

================================================================================
# Breast cancer (disease)
# Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Breast_cancer
================================================================================

Breast cancer is a cancer that develops from breast tissue. Signs of breast cancer may include: a lump in the breast, a change in breast shape, dimpling of the skin, milk rejection, fluid coming from the nipple, a newly inverted nipple, or a red or scaly patch of skin. In those with distant spread of the disease, there may be bone pain, swollen lymph nodes, shortness of breath, or yellow skin.
Risk factors for developing breast cancer include obesity, a lack of physical exercise, alcohol consumption, hormone replacement therapy during menopause, ionizing radiation, an early age at first menstruation, having children late in life (or not at all), older age, having a prior history of breast cancer, and a family history of breast cancer. About five to ten percent of cases are the result of an inherited genetic predisposition, including BRCA mutations among others. Breast cancer most commonly develops in cells from the lining of milk ducts and the lobules that supply these ducts with milk. Cancers developing from the ducts are known as ductal carcinomas, while those developing from lobules are known as lobular carcinomas. There are more than 18 other sub-types of breast cancer. The diagnosis of breast cancer is confirmed by taking a biopsy of the concerning tissue. Once the diagnosis is made, further tests are carried out to determine if the cancer has spread beyond the breast and which treatments are most likely to be effective.
Breast cancer screening can be instrumental, given that the size of a breast cancer and its spread are among the most critical factors in predicting the prognosis of the disease. Breast cancers found during screening are typically smaller and less likely to have spread outside the breast. Training health workers to do clinical breast examination may have potential to detect breast cancer at an early stage. A 2013 Cochrane review found that it was unclear whether mammographic screening does more harm than good, in that a large proportion of women who test positive turn out not to have the disease. A 2009 review for the US Preventive Services Task Force found evidence of benefit in those 40 to 70 years of age, and the organization recommends screening every two years in women 50 to 74 years of age.
The medications tamoxifen or raloxifene may be used in an effort to prevent breast cancer in those who are at high risk of developing it. Surgical removal of both breasts is another preventive measure in some high risk women. In those who have been diagnosed with cancer, a number of treatments may be used, including surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, and targeted therapy. Types of surgery vary from breast-conserving surgery to mastectomy. Breast reconstruction may take place at the time of surgery or at a later date. In those in whom the cancer has spread to other parts of the body, treatments are mostly aimed at improving quality of life and comfort.
Outcomes for breast cancer vary depending on the cancer type, the extent of disease, and the person's age. The five-year survival rates in United States and in the UK are over 90%. In developing countries, five-year survival rates are lower. Worldwide, breast cancer is the leading type of cancer in women, accounting for 25% of all cases. In 2018, it resulted in two million new cases and 627,000 deaths. It is more common in developed countries, and is more than 100 times more common in women than in men. For transgender individuals on gender-affirming hormone therapy, breast cancer is five times more common in cisgender women than in transgender men, and 46 times more common in transgender women than in cisgender men.


== Signs and symptoms ==

Most people with breast cancer have no symptoms at the time of diagnosis; their tumor is detected by a breast cancer screening test. For those who do have symptoms, a new lump in the breast is most common. Most breast lumps are not cancer, though lumps that are painless, hard, and with irregular edges are more likely to be cancerous. Other symptoms include  skin thickening known as peau d'orange swelling or pain in the breast; dimpling, thickening, redness, or dryness of the breast skin; and pain, or inversion of the nipple. Some may experience unusual discharge from the breasts, or swelling of the lymph nodes under the arms or along the collar bone.
Some less common forms of breast cancer cause distinctive symptoms. Up to 5% of people with breast cancer have inflammatory breast cancer, where cancer cells block the lymph vessels of one breast, causing the breast to substantially swell and redden over three to six months. Up to 3% of people with breast cancer have Paget's disease of the breast, with eczema-like red, scaly irritation on the nipple and areola.
Advanced tumors can spread (metastasize) beyond the breast, most commonly to the bones, liver, lungs, and brain. Bone metastases can cause swelling, progressive bone pain, and weakening of the bones that leads to fractures. Liver metastases can cause abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and skin problems – rash, itchy skin, or yellowing of the skin (jaundice). Those with lung metastases experience chest pain, shortness of breath, and regular coughing. Metastases in the brain can cause persistent headache, seizures, nausea, vomiting, and disruptions to the affected person's speech, vision, memory, and regular behavior.


== Screening ==

Breast cancer screening refers to testing women without breast cancer symptoms in an attempt to diagnose breast tumors early when treatments are more successful. The most common screening test for breast cancer is low-dose X-ray imaging of the breast, called mammography. Each breast is pressed between two plates and imaged. Tumors can appear unusually dense within the breast, distort the shape of surrounding tissue, or cause small dense flecks called microcalcifications. Radiologists generally report mammogram results on a standardized scale – the six-point Breast Imaging-Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) is the most common globally – where a higher number corresponds to a greater risk of a cancerous tumor.
A mammogram also reveals breast density; dense breast tissue appears opaque on a mammogram and can obscure tumors. BI-RADS categorizes breast density into four categories. Mammography can detect around 90% of breast tumors in the least dense breasts (called "fatty" breasts), but just 60% in the most dense breasts (called "extremely dense"). Women with particularly dense breasts can instead be screened by ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or tomosynthesis, all of which more sensitively detect breast tumors.

Regular screening mammography reduces breast cancer deaths by at least 20%. Most medical guidelines recommend annual screening mammograms for women aged 50–70. Screening also reduces breast cancer mortality in women aged 40–49, and some guidelines recommend annual screening in this age group as well. For women at high risk for developing breast cancer, most guidelines recommend adding MRI screening to mammography, to increase the chance of detecting potentially dangerous tumors. Regularly feeling one's own breasts for lumps or other abnormalities, called breast self-examination, does not reduce a person's chance of dying from breast cancer. Clinical breast exams, where a health professional feels the breasts for abnormalities, are common; whether they reduce the risk of dying from breast cancer is not known. Regular breast cancer screening is commonplace in most wealthy nations, but remains uncommon in the world's poorer countries.
Still, mammography has its disadvantages. Overall, screening mammograms miss about 1 in 8 breast cancers, they can also give false-positive results, causing extra anxiety and making patients overgo unnecessary additional exams, such as bioposies.


== Diagnosis ==

Those who have a suspected tumor from a mammogram or physical exam first undergo additional imaging – typically a second "diagnostic" mammogram and ultrasound – to confirm its presence and location. A biopsy is then taken of the suspected tumor. Breast biopsy is typically done by core needle biopsy, with a hollow needle used to collect tissue from the area of interest. Suspected tumors that appear to be filled with fluid are often instead sampled by fine-needle aspiration. Around 10–20% of breast biopsies are positive for cancer. Most biopsied breast masses are instead caused by fibrocystic breast changes, a term that encompasses benign pockets of fluid, cell growth, or fibrous tissue.


=== Classification ===

Breast cancers are classified by several grading systems, each of which assesses a tumor characteristic that impacts a person's prognosis. First, a tumor is classified by the tissue it arises from, or the appearance of the tumor tissue under a microscope. Most breast cancers (85%) are ductal carcinoma – derived from the lining of the mammary ducts. 10% are lobular carcinoma – derived from the mammary lobes – or mixed ductal/lobular carcinoma. Rarer types include mucinous carcinoma (around 2.5% of cases; surrounded by mucin), tubular carcinoma (1.5%; full of small tubes of epithelial cells), medullary carcinoma (1%; resembling "medullary" or middle-layer tissue), and papillary carcinoma (1%; covered in finger-like growths). Oftentimes a biopsy reveals cells that are cancerous but have not yet spread beyond their original location. This condition, called carcinoma in situ, is often considered "precancerous" rather than a dangerous cancer itself. Those with ductal carcinoma in situ (in the mammary ducts) are at increased risk for developing true invasive breast cancer – around a third develop breast cancer within five years. Lobular carcinoma in situ (in the mammary lobes) rarely causes a noticeable lump, and is often found incidentally during a biopsy for another reason. It is commonly spread throughout both breasts. Those with lobular carcinoma in situ also have an increased risk of developing breast cancer – around 1% develop breast cancer each year. However, their risk of dying of breast cancer is no higher than the rest of the population.
Invasive tumor tissue is assigned a grade based on how distinct it appears from healthy breast. Breast tumors are graded on three features: the proportion of cancer cells that form tubules, the appearance of the cell nucleus, and how many cells are actively replicating. Each feature is scored on a three-point scale, with a higher score indicating less healthy looking tissue. A grade is assigned based on the sum of the three scores. Combined scores of 3, 4, or 5 represent grade 1, a slower-growing cancer. Scores of 6 or 7 represent grade 2. Scores of 8 or 9 represent grade 3, a faster-growing, more aggressive cancer.
In addition to grading, tumor biopsy samples are now tested by immunohistochemistry to determine if the tissue contains the proteins estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), or human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). Earlier ER and PR were quantified using standardized assays developed by New England Nuclear & Wittliff. Tumors containing either ER or PR are called "hormone receptor-positive" and can be treated with hormone therapies. Around 15 to 20% of tumors contain HER2; these can be treated with HER2-targeted therapies. The remainder that do not contain ER, PR, or HER2 are called "triple-negative" tumors, and tend to grow more quickly than other breast cancer types.
After the tumor is evaluated, the breast cancer case is staged using the American Joint Committee on Cancer and Union for International Cancer Control's TNM staging system. Scores are assigned based on characteristics of the tumor (T), lymph nodes (N), and any metastases (M). T scores are determine by the size and extent of the tumor. Tumors less than 2 centimeters (cm) across are designated T1. Tumors 2–5 cm across are T2. A tumor greater than 5 cm across is T3. Tumors that extend to the chest wall or to the skin are designated T4. N scores are based on whether the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes. N0 indicates no spread to the lymph nodes. N1 is for tumors that have spread to the closest axillary lymph nodes (called "level I" and "level II" axillary lymph nodes, in the armpit). N2 is for spread to the intramammary lymph nodes (on the other side of the breast, near the chest center), or for axillary lymph nodes that appear attached to each other or to the tissue around them (a sign of more severely affected tissue). N3 designates tumors that have spread to the highest axillary lymph nodes (called "level 3" axillary lymph nodes, above the armpit near the shoulder), to the supraclavicular lymph nodes (along the neck), or to both the axillary and intramammary lymph nodes. The M score is binary: M0 indicates no evidence metastases; M1 indicates metastases have been detected.
TNM scores are then combined with tumor grades and ER/PR/HER2 status to calculate a cancer case's "prognostic stage group". Stage groups range from I (best prognosis) to IV (worst prognosis), with groups I, II, and III further divided into subgroups IA, IB, IIA, IIB, IIIA, IIIB, and IIIC. In general, tumors of higher T and N scores and higher grades are assigned higher stage groups. Tumors that are ER, PR, and HER2 positive are slightly lower stage group than those that are negative. Tumors that have metastasized are stage IV, regardless of the other scored characteristics.


== Management ==

The management of breast cancer depends on the affected person's health, the cancer case's molecular characteristics, and how far the tumor has spread at the time of diagnosis.


=== Local tumors ===

Those whose tumors have not spread beyond the breast often undergo surgery to remove the tumor and some surrounding breast tissue. The surgery method is typically chosen to spare as much healthy breast tissue as possible, removing just the tumor (lumpectomy) or a larger part of the breast (partial mastectomy). Those with large or multiple tumors, high genetic risk of subsequent cancers, or who are unable to receive radiation therapy may instead opt for full removal of the affected breast(s) (full mastectomy). To reduce the risk of cancer spreading, women will often have the nearest lymph node removed in a procedure called sentinel lymph node biopsy. Dye is injected near the tumor site, and several hours later the lymph node the dye accumulates in is removed.
After surgery, many undergo radiotherapy to decrease the chance of cancer recurrence. Those who had lumpectomies receive radiation to the whole breast. Those who had a mastectomy and are at elevated risk of tumor spread – tumor greater than five centimeters wide, or cancerous cells in nearby lymph nodes – receive radiation to the mastectomy scar and chest wall. If cancerous cells have spread to nearby lymph nodes, those lymph nodes will be irradiated as well. Radiation is typically given five days per week, for up to seven weeks. Radiotherapy for breast cancer is typically delivered via external beam radiotherapy, where a device focuses radiation beams onto the targeted parts of the body. Instead, some undergo brachytherapy, where radioactive material is placed into a device inserted at the surgical site the tumor was removed from. Fresh radioactive material is added twice a day for five days, then the device is removed. Surgery plus radiation typically eliminates a person's breast tumor. Less than 5% of those treated have their breast tumor grow back. After surgery and radiation, the breast can be surgically reconstructed, either by adding a breast implant or transferring excess tissue from another part of the body.
Chemotherapy reduces the chance of cancer recurring in the next ten years by around a third. However, 1-2% of those on chemotherapy experience life-threatening or permanent side effects. To balance these benefits and risks, chemotherapy is typically offered to those with a higher risk of cancer recurrence. There is no established risk cutoff for offering chemotherapy; determining who should receive chemotherapy is controversial. Chemotherapy drugs are typically given in two- to three-week cycles, with periods of drug treatment interspersed with rest periods to recover from the therapies' side effects. Four to six cycles are given in total. Many classes of chemotherapeutic agents are effective for breast cancer treatment, including the DNA alkylating drugs (cyclophosphamide), anthracyclines (doxorubicin and epirubicin), antimetabolites (fluorouracil, capecitabine, and methotrexate), taxanes (docetaxel and paclitaxel), and platinum-based chemotherapies (cisplatin and carboplatin).
 Chemotherapies from different classes are typically given in combination, with particular chemotherapy drugs selected based on the affected person's health and the different chemotherapeutics' side effects. Anthrocyclines and cyclophosphamide cause leukemia in up to 1% of those treated. Anthrocyclines also cause congestive heart failure in around 1% of people treated. Taxanes cause peripheral neuropathy, which is permanent in up to 5% of those treated. The same chemotherapy agents can be given before surgery – called neoadjuvant therapy – to shrink tumors, making them easier to safely remove.
For those whose tumors are HER2-positive, adding the HER2-targeted antibody trastuzumab to chemotherapy reduces the chance of cancer recurrence and death by at least a third. Trastuzumab is given weekly or every three weeks for twelve months. Adding a second HER2-targeted antibody, pertuzumab slightly enhances treatment efficacy. In rare cases, trastuzumab can disrupt heart function, and so it is typically not given in conjunction with anthracyclines, which can also damage the heart.
After their chemotherapy course, those whose tumors are ER-positive or PR-positive benefit from endocrine therapy, which reduces the levels of estrogens and progesterones that hormone receptor-positive breast cancers require to survive. Tamoxifen treatment blocks the ER in the breast and some other tissues, and reduces the risk of breast cancer death by around 40% over the next ten years. Chemically blocking estrogen production with GnRH-targeted drugs (goserelin, leuprolide, or triptorelin) and aromatase inhibitors (anastrozole, letrozole, or exemestane) slightly improves survival, but has more severe side effects. Side effects of estrogen depletion include hot flashes, vaginal discomfort, and muscle and joint pain. Endocrine therapy is typically recommended for at least five years after surgery and chemotherapy, and is sometimes continued for 10 years or longer.
Women with breast cancer who had a lumpectomy or a mastectomy and kept their other breast have similar survival rates to those who had a double mastectomy. There seems to be no survival advantage to removing the other breast, with only a 7% chance of cancer occurring in the other breast over 20 years.


=== Metastatic disease ===
For around 1 in 5 people treated for localized breast cancer, their tumors eventually spread to distant body sites – most commonly the nearby bones (67% of cases), liver (41%), lungs (37%), brain (13%), and peritoneum (10%). Those with metastatic disease can receive further chemotherapy, typically starting with capecitabine, an anthracycline, or a taxane. As one chemotherapy drug fails to control the cancer, another is started. In addition to the chemotherapeutic drugs used for localized cancer, gemcitabine, vinorelbine, etoposide, and epothilones are sometimes effective. Those with bone metastases benefit from regular infusion of the bone-strengthening agents denosumab and the bisphosphonates; infusion every three months reduces the chance of bone pain, fractures, and bone hypercalcemia.
Up to 70% of those with ER-positive metastatic breast cancer benefit from additional endocrine therapy. Therapy options include those used in localized cancer, plus toremifene and fulvestrant, often used in combination with CDK4/6 inhibitors (palbociclib, ribociclib, or abemaciclib). When one endocrine therapy fails, most will benefit from transitioning to a second one. Some respond to a third sequential therapy as well. Adding an mTOR inhibitor, everolimus, can further slow the tumors' progression.
Those with HER2-positive metastatic disease can benefit from continued use of trastuzumab, alone, in combination with pertuzumab, or in combination with chemotherapy. Those whose tumors continue to progress on trastuzumab benefit from HER2-targeted antibody drug conjugates (HER2 antibodies linked to chemotherapy drugs) trastuzumab emtansine or trastuzumab deruxtecan. The HER2-targeted antibody margetuximab can also prolong survival, as can HER2 inhibitors lapatinib, neratinib, or tucatinib.
Certain therapies are targeted at those whose tumors have particular gene mutations: Alpelisib or capivasertib for those with mutations activating the protein PIK3CA. PARP inhibitors (olaparib and talazoparib) for those with mutations that inactivate BRCA1 or BRCA2. The immune checkpoint inhibitor antibody atezolizumab for those whose tumors express PD-L1. And the similar immunotherapy pembrolizumab for those whose tumors have mutations in various DNA repair pathways.
Imlunestrant (Inluriyo) was approved for medical use in the United States in September 2025.


=== Supportive care ===

Many breast cancer therapies have side effects that can be alleviated with appropriate supportive care. Chemotherapy causes hair loss, nausea, and vomiting in nearly everyone who receives it. Antiemetic drugs can alleviate nausea and vomiting; cooling the scalp with a cold cap during chemotherapy treatments may reduce hair loss. Many complain of cognitive issues during chemotherapy treatment. These usually resolve within a few months of the end of chemotherapy treatment. Those on endocrine therapy often experience hot flashes, muscle and joint pain, and vaginal dryness/discomfort that can lead to issues having sex. Around half of women have their hot flashes alleviated by taking antidepressants; pain can be treated with physical therapy and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; counseling and use of personal lubricants can improve sexual issues.
In women with non-metastatic breast cancer, psychological interventions such as cognitive behavioral therapy can have positive effects on outcomes such as cognitive impairment, anxiety, depression and mood disturbance, and can also improve the quality of life. Physical activity interventions, yoga and meditation may also have beneficial effects on health related quality of life, cognitive impairment, anxiety, fitness and physical activity in women with breast cancer following adjuvant therapy.
In-person and virtual peer support groups for patients and survivors of breast cancer can promote quality of life and companionship based on similar lived experiences. The potential benefits of peer support are particularly impactful for women with breast cancer facing additional unique challenges related to ethnicity and socioeconomic status. Peer support groups tailored to adolescents and young adult women can improve coping strategies against age-specific types of distress associated with breast cancer, including post-traumatic stress disorder and body image issues.


== Prognosis ==
Different countries have different prognosis. In the United States, UK, South Korea, Japan and Australia, more than 90% of women survive breast cancer for at least five years from diagnosis. In China, this is 82%. India saw a 66% survival rate.
Breast cancer prognosis varies widely depending on how far the tumor has spread at the time of diagnosis. Overall, 92% of women diagnosed with breast cancer in the United States survive at least five years from diagnosis. Those whose tumor(s) are completely confined to the breast (nearly two thirds of cases) have the best prognoses – 100% survive at least five years. Those whose tumors have metastasized to distant sites have relatively poor prognoses – 33% survive at least five years from the time of diagnosis.
Triple-negative breast cancer (up to 15% of cases) and inflammatory breast cancer (up to 5% of cases) are particularly aggressive and have relatively poor prognoses. Those with triple-negative breast cancer have an overall five-year survival rate of 78% – 92% for those whose tumors are confined to the breast; 15% for those with metastases. Those with inflammatory breast cancer are diagnosed after the cancer has already spread to the skin of the breast. They have an overall five-year survival rate of 40%; 22% for those with metastases. The relatively rare tumors with tubular, mucinous, or medullary growth tend to have better prognoses.
In addition to the factors that influence cancer staging, a person's age can also impact prognosis. Breast cancer before age 35 is rare, and is more likely to be associated with genetic predisposition to aggressive cancer. Conversely, breast cancer in those aged over 75 is associated with poorer prognosis.


== Risk factors ==


=== Hormonal ===
Up to 80% of the variation in breast cancer frequency across countries is due to differences in reproductive history
that impact a woman's levels of female sex hormones (estrogens). Women who begin menstruating earlier (before age 12) or who undergo menopause later (after 51) are at increased risk of developing breast cancer. Women who give birth early in life are protected from breast cancer – someone who gives birth as a teenager has around a 70% lower risk of developing breast cancer than someone who does not have children. That protection wanes with higher maternal age at first birth, and disappears completely by age 35. Breastfeeding also reduces one's chance of developing breast cancer, with an approximately 4% reduction in breast cancer risk for every 12 months of breastfeeding experience. Those who lack functioning ovaries have reduced levels of estrogens, and therefore greatly reduced breast cancer risk.
Hormone replacement therapy for treatment of menopause symptoms can also increase a woman's risk of developing breast cancer, though the effect depends on the type and duration of therapy. Combined progesterone/estrogen therapy increases breast cancer risk – approximately doubling one's risk after 6–7 years of treatment (though the same therapy decreases the risk of colorectal cancer). Hormone treatment with estrogen alone has no effect on breast cancer risk, but increases one's risk of developing endometrial cancer, and therefore is only given to women who have undergone hysterectomies.
In the 1980s, the abortion–breast cancer hypothesis posited that induced abortion increased the risk of developing breast cancer. This hypothesis was the subject of extensive scientific inquiry, which concluded that neither miscarriages nor abortions are associated with a heightened risk for breast cancer.
The use of hormonal birth control does not cause breast cancer for most women; if it has an effect, it is small (on the order of 0.01% per user–year), temporary, and offset by the users' significantly reduced risk of ovarian and endometrial cancers. Among those with a family history of breast cancer, use of modern oral contraceptives does not appear to affect the risk of breast cancer.


=== Lifestyle ===

Drinking alcoholic beverages increases the risk of breast cancer, even among very light drinkers (women drinking less than half of one alcoholic drink per day). The risk is highest among heavy drinkers. Globally, about one in ten cases of breast cancer is caused by women drinking alcoholic beverages. Alcohol use is among the most common modifiable risk factors.
Obesity and diabetes increase the risk of breast cancer. A high body mass index (BMI) causes 7% of breast cancers while diabetes is responsible for 2%. At the same time the correlation between obesity and breast cancer is not at all linear. Studies show that those who rapidly gain weight in adulthood are at higher risk than those who have been overweight since childhood. Likewise, excess fat in the midriff seems to induce a higher risk than excess weight carried in the lower body. Dietary factors that may increase risk include a high-fat diet and obesity-related high cholesterol levels.
Dietary iodine deficiency may also play a role in the development of breast cancer.
Smoking tobacco appears to increase the risk of breast cancer, with the greater the amount smoked and the earlier in life that smoking began, the higher the risk. In those who are long-term smokers, the relative risk is increased by 35% to 50%.
A lack of physical activity has been linked to about 10% of cases. Sitting regularly for prolonged periods is associated with higher mortality from breast cancer. The risk is not negated by regular exercise, though it is lowered.
Actions to prevent breast cancer include not drinking alcoholic beverages, maintaining a healthy body composition, avoiding smoking and eating healthy food. Combining all of these (leading the healthiest possible lifestyle) would make almost a quarter of breast cancer cases worldwide preventable. The remaining three-quarters of breast cancer cases cannot be prevented through lifestyle changes.
Other risk factors include circadian disruptions related to shift-work and routine late-night eating. A number of chemicals have also been linked, including polychlorinated biphenyls, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and organic solvents. Although the radiation from mammography is a low dose, it is estimated that yearly screening from 40 to 80 years of age will cause approximately 225 cases of fatal breast cancer per million women screened.


=== Genetics ===
Around 10% of those with breast cancer have a family history of the disease or genetic factors that put them at higher risk. Women who have had a first-degree relative (mother or sister) diagnosed with breast cancer are at a 30–50% increased risk of being diagnosed with breast cancer themselves. In those with zero, one or two affected relatives, the risk of breast cancer before the age of 80 is 7.8%, 13.3%, and 21.1% with a subsequent mortality from the disease of 2.3%, 4.2%, and 7.6% respectively.
Women with certain genetic variants are at higher risk of developing breast cancer. The most well known are variants of the BRCA genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. Women with pathogenic variants in either gene have around a 70% chance of developing breast cancer in their lifetime, as well as an approximately 33% chance of developing ovarian cancer. Pathogenic variants in PALB2 – a gene whose product directly interacts with that of BRCA2 – also increase breast cancer risk; a woman with such a variant has around a 50% increased risk of developing breast cancer. Variants in other tumor suppressor genes can also increase one's risk of developing breast cancer, namely p53 (causes Li–Fraumeni syndrome), PTEN (causes Cowden syndrome), and PALB1.


=== Medical conditions ===
Breast changes like atypical ductal hyperplasia found in benign breast conditions such as fibrocystic breast changes, are correlated with an increased breast cancer risk.
Diabetes might also increase the risk of breast cancer. Autoimmune diseases such as lupus erythematosus seem also to increase the risk for the acquisition of breast cancer.
Women whose breasts have been exposed to substantial radiation doses before the age of 30 – typically due to repeated chest fluoroscopies or treatment for Hodgkin lymphoma – are at increased risk for developing breast cancer. Radioactive iodine therapy (used to treat thyroid disease) and radiation exposures after age 30 are not associated with breast cancer risk.


== Pathophysiology ==

Based on the existence or lack of molecular markers for the estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (ERBB2; formerly HER2), breast cancer is divided into three main categories. About 70% of patients have hormone receptor-positive/ERBB2-negative tumours, which are the most prevalent type. About 15% of cases are triple-negative (lacking all three conventional markers), whereas 15%–20% of cases are ERBB2-positive. While hormone receptor-positive tumours are more common in elderly women, triple-negative breast cancer is more common in younger Black or Hispanic women. The major causes of sporadic breast cancer are associated with hormone levels. Breast cancer is promoted by estrogen. This hormone activates the development of breast throughout puberty, menstrual cycles and pregnancy. The imbalance between estrogen and progesterone during the menstrual phases causes cell proliferation. Moreover, oxidative metabolites of estrogen can increase DNA damage and mutations. Repeated cycling and the impairment of repair process can transform a normal cell into pre-malignant and eventually malignant cell through mutation. During the pre-malignant stage, high proliferation of stromal cells can be activated by estrogen to support the development of breast cancer. During the ligand binding activation, the ER can regulate gene expression by interacting with estrogen response elements within the promotor of specific genes. The expression and activation of ER due to lack of estrogen can be stimulated by extracellular signals. The ER directly binding with the several proteins, including growth factor receptors, can promote the expression of genes related to cell growth and survival.
Breast cancer, like other cancers, occurs because of an interaction between an environmental (external) factor and a genetically susceptible host. Normal cells divide as many times as needed, and stop. They attach to other cells and stay in place in tissues. Cells become cancerous when they lose their ability to stop dividing, to attach to other cells, to stay where they belong, and to die at the proper time.
Normal cells will self-destruct (programmed cell death) when they are no longer needed. Until then, cells are protected from programmed death by several protein clusters and pathways. One of the protective pathways is the PI3K/AKT pathway; another is the RAS/MEK/ERK pathway. Sometimes the genes along these protective pathways are mutated in a way that turns them permanently "on", rendering the cell incapable of self-destructing when it is no longer needed. This is one of the steps that causes cancer in combination with other mutations. Normally, the PTEN protein turns off the PI3K/AKT pathway when the cell is ready for programmed cell death. In some breast cancers, the gene for the PTEN protein is mutated, so the PI3K/AKT pathway is stuck in the "on" position, and the cancer cell does not self-destruct.
Mutations that can lead to breast cancer have been experimentally linked to estrogen exposure. Additionally, G-protein coupled estrogen receptors have been associated with various cancers of the female reproductive system including breast cancer.
Abnormal growth factor signaling in the interaction between stromal cells and epithelial cells can facilitate malignant cell growth. In breast adipose tissue, overexpression of leptin leads to increased cell proliferation and cancer.
Some mutations associated with cancer, such as p53, BRCA1 and BRCA2, occur in mechanisms to correct errors in DNA. The inherited mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes can interfere with repair of DNA crosslinks and double-strand breaks (known functions of the encoded protein). These carcinogens cause DNA damage such as DNA crosslinks and double-strand breaks that often require repairs by pathways containing BRCA1 and BRCA2.
GATA-3 directly controls the expression of estrogen receptor (ER) and other genes associated with epithelial differentiation, and the loss of GATA-3 leads to loss of differentiation and poor prognosis due to cancer cell invasion and metastasis.


== Prevention ==


=== Lifestyle ===
Women can reduce their risk of breast cancer by maintaining a healthy weight, reducing alcohol use, increasing physical activity, and breastfeeding. These modifications might prevent 38% of breast cancers in the US, 42% in the UK, 28% in Brazil, and 20% in China. The benefits with moderate exercise such as brisk walking are seen at all age groups including postmenopausal women. High levels of physical activity reduce the risk of breast cancer by about 14%. Strategies that encourage regular physical activity and reduce obesity could also have other benefits, such as reduced risks of cardiovascular disease and diabetes. A study that included data from 130,957 women of European ancestry found "strong evidence that greater levels of physical activity and less sedentary time are likely to reduce breast cancer risk, with results generally consistent across breast cancer subtypes".
The American Cancer Society and the American Society of Clinical Oncology advised in 2016 that people should eat a diet high in vegetables, fruits, whole grains, and legumes. Eating foods rich in soluble fiber contributes to reducing breast cancer risk. High intake of citrus fruit has been associated with a 10% reduction in the risk of breast cancer. Marine omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids appear to reduce the risk. High consumption of soy-based foods may reduce risk.


=== Preventive surgery ===
Removal of the breasts before breast cancer develops (called preventive mastectomy) reduces the risk of developing breast cancer by more than 95%. In women genetically predisposed to developing breast cancer, preventive mastectomy reduces their risk of dying from breast cancer. For those at normal risk, preventive mastectomy does not reduce their chance of dying, and so is generally not recommended. Removing the second breast in a person who has breast cancer (contralateral risk-reducing mastectomy or CRRM) may reduce the risk of cancer in the second breast, but it is not clear whether removing the second breast improves the chance of survival. An increasing number of women who test positive for faulty BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes choose to have risk-reducing surgery. The average waiting time for undergoing the procedure is two years, which is much longer than recommended.


=== Medications ===
Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) reduce the risk of breast cancer but increase the risk of thromboembolism and endometrial cancer. There is no overall change in the risk of death. They are thus not recommended for the prevention of breast cancer in women at average risk but it is recommended they be offered for those at high risk and over the age of 35. The benefit of breast cancer reduction continues for at least five years after stopping a course of treatment with these medications. Aromatase inhibitors (such as exemestane and anastrozole) may be more effective than SERMs (such as tamoxifen) at reducing breast cancer risk and they are not associated with an increased risk of endometrial cancer and thromboembolism.


== Epidemiology ==

Breast cancer is the most common invasive cancer in women in most countries, accounting for 30% of cancer cases in women. In 2022, an estimated 2.3 million women were diagnosed with breast cancer, and 670,000 died of the disease. The incidence of breast cancer is rising by around 3% per year, as populations in many countries are getting older.
Rates of breast cancer vary across the world, but generally correlate with wealth. Around 1 in 12 women are diagnosed with breast cancer in wealthier countries, compared to 1 in 27 in lower income countries. Most of that difference is due to differences in menstrual and reproductive histories – women in wealthier countries tend to begin menstruating earlier and have children later, both factors that increase risk of developing breast cancer. People in lower income countries tend to have less access to breast cancer screening and treatments, and so breast cancer death rates tend to be higher. 1 in 71 women die of breast cancer in wealthy countries, while 1 in 48 die of the disease in lower income countries.
Breast cancer predominantly affects women; less than 1% of those with breast cancer are men. Women can develop breast cancer as early as adolescence, but risk increases with age, and 75% of cases are in women over 50 years old. The risk over a woman's lifetime is approximately 1.5% at age 40, 3% at age 50, and more than 4% risk at age 70.


== History ==

Because of its visibility, breast cancer was the form of cancer most often described in ancient documents. Because autopsies were rare, cancers of the internal organs were essentially invisible to ancient medicine. Breast cancer, however, could be felt through the skin, and in its advanced state often developed into fungating lesions: the tumor would become necrotic (die from the inside, causing the tumor to appear to break up) and ulcerate through the skin, weeping fetid, dark fluid.
The oldest discovered evidence of breast cancer is from Egypt and dates back 4200 years, to the Sixth Dynasty. The study of a woman's remains from the necropolis of Qubbet el-Hawa showed the typical destructive damage due to metastatic spread. The Edwin Smith Papyrus describes eight cases of tumors or ulcers of the breast that were treated by cauterization. The writing says about the disease, "There is no treatment." For centuries, physicians described similar cases in their practices, with the same conclusion. Ancient medicine, from the time of the Greeks through the 17th century, was based on humoralism, and thus believed that breast cancer was generally caused by imbalances in the fundamental fluids that controlled the body, especially an excess of black bile. Alternatively it was seen as divine punishment.
Mastectomy for breast cancer was performed at least as early as AD 548, when it was proposed by the court physician Aetios of Amida to Theodora. It was not until doctors achieved greater understanding of the circulatory system in the 17th century that they could link breast cancer's spread to the lymph nodes in the armpit. In the early 18th century the French surgeon Jean Louis Petit performed total mastectomies that included removing the axillary lymph nodes, as he recognized that this reduced recurrence. Petit's work built on the methods of the surgeon Bernard Peyrilhe, who in the 17th century additionally removed the pectoral muscle underlying the breast, as he judged that this greatly improved the prognosis. But poor results and the considerable risk to the patient meant that physicians did not share the opinion of surgeons such as Nicolaes Tulp, who in the 17th century proclaimed "the sole remedy is a timely operation." The eminent surgeon Richard Wiseman documented in the mid-17th century that following 12 mastectomies, two patients died during the operation, eight patients died shortly after the operation from progressive cancer and only two of the 12 patients were cured. Physicians were conservative in the treatment they prescribed in the early stages of breast cancer. Patients were treated with a mixture of detox purges, blood letting and traditional remedies that were supposed to lower acidity, such as the alkaline arsenic.
When in 1664 Anne of Austria was diagnosed with breast cancer, the initial treatment involved compresses saturated with hemlock juice. When the lumps increased the King's physician commenced a treatment with arsenic ointments. The royal patient died in 1666 in atrocious pain. Each failing treatment for breast cancer led to the search for new treatments, spurring a market in remedies that were advertised and sold by quacks, herbalists, chemists and apothecaries. The lack of anesthesia and antiseptics made mastectomy a painful and dangerous ordeal. In the 18th century, a wide variety of anatomical discoveries were accompanied by new theories about the cause and growth of breast cancer. The investigative surgeon John Hunter claimed that neural fluid generated breast cancer. Other surgeons proposed that milk within the mammary ducts led to cancerous growths. Theories about trauma to the breast as cause for malignant changes in breast tissue were advanced. The discovery of breast lumps and swellings fueled controversies about hard tumors and whether lumps were benign stages of cancer. Medical opinion about necessary immediate treatment varied. The surgeon Benjamin Bell advocated removal of the entire breast, even when only a portion was affected.

Breast cancer was uncommon until the 19th century, when improvements in sanitation and control of deadly infectious diseases resulted in dramatic increases in lifespan. Previously, most women had died too young to have developed breast cancer. In 1878, an article in Scientific American described historical treatment by pressure intended to induce local ischemia in cases when surgical removal were not possible. William Stewart Halsted started performing radical mastectomies in 1882, helped greatly by advances in general surgical technology, such as aseptic technique and anesthesia. The Halsted radical mastectomy often involved removing both breasts, associated lymph nodes, and the underlying chest muscles. This often led to long-term pain and disability, but was seen as necessary to prevent the cancer from recurring. Before the advent of the Halsted radical mastectomy, 20-year survival rates were only 10%; Halsted's surgery raised that rate to 50%.
Breast cancer staging systems were developed in the 1920s and 1930s to determining the extent to which a cancer has developed by growing and spreading. The first case-controlled study on breast cancer epidemiology was done by Janet Lane-Claypon, who published a comparative study in 1926 of 500 breast cancer cases and 500 controls of the same background and lifestyle for the British Ministry of Health. Radical mastectomies remained the standard of care in the USA until the 1970s, but in Europe, breast-sparing procedures, often followed by radiation therapy, were generally adopted in the 1950s. In 1955 George Crile Jr. published Cancer and Common Sense arguing that cancer patients needed to understand available treatment options. Crile became a close friend of the environmentalist Rachel Carson, who had undergone a Halsted radical mastectomy in 1960 to treat her malign breast cancer. The US oncologist Jerome Urban promoted super radical mastectomies, taking even more tissue, until 1963, when the ten-year survival rates proved equal to the less-damaging radical mastectomy. Carson died in 1964 and Crile went on to published a wide variety of articles, both in the popular press and in medical journals, challenging the widespread use of the Halsted radical mastectomy. In 1973 Crile published What Women Should Know About the Breast Cancer Controversy. When in 1974 Betty Ford was diagnosed with breast cancer, the options for treating breast cancer were openly discussed in the press. During the 1970s, a new understanding of metastasis led to perceiving cancer as a systemic illness as well as a localized one, and more sparing procedures were developed that proved equally effective.
In the 1980s and 1990s, thousands of women who had successfully completed standard treatment then demanded and received high-dose bone marrow transplants, thinking this would lead to better long-term survival. However, it proved completely ineffective, and 15–20% of women died because of the brutal treatment. The 1995 reports from the Nurses' Health Study and the 2002 conclusions of the Women's Health Initiative trial conclusively proved that HRT significantly increased the incidence of breast cancer.


== Society and culture ==

Before the 20th century, breast cancer was feared and discussed in hushed tones, as if it were shameful. As little could be safely done with primitive surgical techniques, women tended to suffer silently rather than seeking care. When surgery advanced, and long-term survival rates improved, women began raising awareness of the disease and the possibility of successful treatment. The "Women's Field Army", run by the American Society for the Control of Cancer (later the American Cancer Society) during the 1930s and 1940s was one of the first organized campaigns. In 1952, the first peer-to-peer support group, called "Reach to Recovery", began providing post-mastectomy, in-hospital visits from women who had survived breast cancer.
The breast cancer movement of the 1980s and 1990s developed out of the larger feminist movements and women's health movement of the 20th century. This series of political and educational campaigns, partly inspired by the politically and socially effective AIDS awareness campaigns, resulted in the widespread acceptance of second opinions before surgery, less invasive surgical procedures, support groups, and other advances in care.


=== Pink ribbon ===

A pink ribbon is the most prominent symbol of breast cancer awareness. Pink ribbons, which can be made inexpensively, are sometimes sold as fundraisers. They may be worn to honor those who have been diagnosed with breast cancer, or to identify products that the manufacturer would like to sell to consumers that are interested in breast cancer. In the 1990s, breast cancer awareness campaigns were launched by US-based corporations. As part of these cause-related marketing campaigns, corporations donated to a variety of breast cancer initiatives for every pink ribbon product that was purchased. The Wall Street Journal noted that "the strong emotions provoked by breast cancer translate to a company's bottom line". While many US corporations donated to existing breast cancer initiatives, others such as Avon established their own breast cancer foundations on the back of pink ribbon products.
Wearing or displaying a pink ribbon has been criticized by the opponents of this practice as a kind of slacktivism, because it has no practical positive effect. It has also been criticized as hypocrisy, because some people wear the pink ribbon to show good will towards women with breast cancer, but then oppose these women's practical goals, like patient rights and anti-pollution legislation. Critics say that the feel-good nature of pink ribbons and pink consumption distracts society from the lack of progress on preventing and curing breast cancer. It is also criticized for reinforcing gender stereotypes and objectifying women and their breasts. Breast Cancer Action launched the "Think Before You Pink" campaign in 2002 against pinkwashing, to target businesses that have co-opted the pink campaign to promote products that cause breast cancer, such as alcoholic beverages.


=== Breast cancer culture ===
In her 2006 book Pink Ribbons, Inc.: Breast Cancer and the Politics of Philanthropy Samantha King claimed that breast cancer has been transformed from a serious disease and individual tragedy to a market-driven industry of survivorship and corporate sales pitch. In 2010 Gayle Sulik argued that the primary purposes or goals of breast cancer culture are to maintain breast cancer's dominance as the pre-eminent women's health issue, to promote the appearance that society is doing something effective about breast cancer, and to sustain and expand the social, political, and financial power of breast cancer activists. In the same year Barbara Ehrenreich published an opinion piece in Harper's Magazine, lamenting that in breast cancer culture, breast cancer therapy is viewed as a rite of passage rather than a disease. To fit into this mold, the woman with breast cancer needs to normalize and feminize her appearance, and minimize the disruption that her health issues cause anyone else. Anger, sadness, and negativity must be silenced. As with most cultural models, people who conform to the model are given social status, in this case as cancer survivors. Women who reject the model are shunned, punished and shamed. The culture is criticized for treating adult women like little girls, as evidenced by "baby" toys such as pink teddy bears given to adult women.


== Health disparities in breast cancer ==
There are ethnic disparities in the mortality rates for breast cancer as well as in breast cancer treatment. Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer affecting women of every ethnic group in the United States. Breast cancer incidence among Black women aged 45 and older is higher than that of white women in the same age group. White women aged 60–84 have higher incidence rates of breast cancer than Black women. Despite this, Black women at every age are more likely to die of breast cancer.
Breast cancer treatment has improved greatly over the years, but Black women are still less likely to obtain treatment compared to white women. Risk factors such as socioeconomic status, late-stage, or breast cancer at diagnosis, genetic differences in tumor subtypes, and differences in healthcare access all contribute to these disparities. Socioeconomic determinants affecting the disparity in breast cancer illness include poverty, culture, and social injustice. In Hispanic women, the incidence of breast cancer is lower than in non-Hispanic women, but is often diagnosed at a later stage than white women with larger tumors.
Black women are usually diagnosed with breast cancer at a younger age than white women. The median age of diagnosis for Black women is 59, in comparison to 62 in White women. The incidence of breast cancer in Black women has increased by 0.4% per year since 1975 and 1.5% per year among Asian/Pacific Islander women since 1992. Incidence rates were stable for non-Hispanic White, Hispanics, and Native American women. The five-year survival rate is noted to be 81% in Black women and 92% in White women. Chinese and Japanese women have the highest survival rates.


=== Disparities in breast cancer screenings ===
Low-income, immigrant, disabled, and racial and sexual minority women are less likely to undergo breast cancer screening and thus are more likely to receive late-stage diagnoses. Ensuring equitable health care, including breast cancer screenings, can positively affect these disparities.
Efforts to promote awareness about the significance of screenings, such as informational materials, are ineffective in reducing these disparities. Successful methods directly address the barriers that prevent access to screenings, such as language barriers or lack of health insurance.
Through community outreach in under-served communities, patient navigators and advocates can offer women personalized assistance with attending screening and follow-up appointments. However, the long-term benefits are unclear, primarily due to a lack of resources and staff to sustain these community-based solutions. Legislation that requires mandatory insurance coverage of language assistance and mammograms has also increased screening rates, particularly among ethnic minority communities. Innovative solutions proven effective include mobile screening vehicles, telehealth consultations, and online tools to assess potential risks and signs of breast cancer.


=== Disparities in breast cancer research ===
A diverse pool of participants in breast cancer research facilitates the investigation of the disease's unique risks and development patterns in ethnic minority populations. These populations experience better health outcomes from medical treatments designed based on research with diverse patient representation.
Within the United States, less than 3% of patients in clinical trials identify as Black, despite representing 12.7% of the national population. Hispanic and indigenous women are also significantly underrepresented in breast cancer research. Lengthy involvement in clinical trials without financial compensation discourages the participation of low-income women unable to miss work or afford traveling expenses. Monetary compensation, language interpreters, and patient navigators can increase the diversity of participants in research and clinical trials.


== Special populations ==


=== Men ===

Breast cancer is relatively uncommon in men, but it can occur. Typically, a breast tumor appears as a lump in the breast. Men who develop gynecomastia (enlargement of the breast tissue due to hormone imbalance) are at increased risk, as are men with disease-associated variations in the BRCA2 gene, high exposure to estrogens, or men with Klinefelter syndrome (who have two copies of the X chromosome, and naturally high estrogen levels). Treatment typically involves surgery, followed by radiation if needed. Around 90% men's tumors are ER-positive, and are treated with endocrine therapy, typically tamoxifen. The disease course and prognosis is similar to that in women of similar age with similar disease characteristics.


=== Pregnant women ===
Diagnosing breast cancer in pregnant women is often delayed as symptoms can be masked by pregnancy-related breast changes. The diagnostic path is the same as in non-pregnant women, except that radiography of the abdomen is avoided. Chemotherapy is avoided during the first trimester, but can be safely administered through the rest of the pregnancy term. Anti-HER2 treatments and endocrine therapies are delayed until after delivery. These treatments given after delivery can cross into the breast milk, and so breast feeding is generally not possible. The prognosis for pregnant women with breast cancer is similar to non-pregnant women of similar age.


== Research ==

Treatments are being evaluated in clinical trials. This includes individual drugs, combinations of drugs, and surgical and radiation techniques Investigations include new types of targeted therapy, cancer vaccines, oncolytic virotherapy, gene therapy and immunotherapy.
The latest research is reported annually at scientific meetings such as that of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium, and the St. Gallen Oncology Conference in St. Gallen, Switzerland. These studies are reviewed by professional societies and other organizations, and formulated into guidelines for specific treatment groups and risk category.
Fenretinide, a retinoid, is also being studied as a way to reduce the risk of breast cancer. In particular, combinations of ribociclib plus endocrine therapy have been the subject of clinical trials.
A 2019 review found moderate certainty evidence that giving people antibiotics before breast cancer surgery helped to prevent surgical site infection (SSI). Further study is required to determine the most effective antibiotic protocol and use in women undergoing immediate breast reconstruction.


=== Cryoablation ===
As of 2014 cryoablation is being studied to see if it could be a substitute for a lumpectomy in small cancers. There is tentative evidence in those with tumors less than 2 centimeters across. It may also be used in those in who surgery is not possible. Another review states that cryoablation looks promising for early breast cancer of small size.


=== Breast cancer cell lines ===

Part of the current knowledge on breast carcinomas is based on in vivo and in vitro studies performed with cell lines derived from breast cancers. These provide an unlimited source of homogenous self-replicating material, free of contaminating stromal cells, and often easily cultured in simple standard media. The first breast cancer cell line described, BT-20, was established in 1958. Since then, and despite sustained work in this area, the number of permanent lines obtained has been strikingly low (about 100). Indeed, attempts to culture breast cancer cell lines from primary tumors have been largely unsuccessful. This poor efficiency was often due to technical difficulties associated with the extraction of viable tumor cells from their surrounding stroma. Most of the available breast cancer cell lines issued from metastatic tumors, mainly from pleural effusions. Effusions provided generally large numbers of dissociated, viable tumor cells with little or no contamination by fibroblasts and other tumor stroma cells. Many of the currently used BCC lines were established in the late 1970s. A very few of them, namely MCF-7, T-47D, MDA-MB-231 and SK-BR-3, account for more than two-thirds of all abstracts reporting studies on mentioned breast cancer cell lines, as concluded from a Medline-based survey.


== Other animals ==
Mammary tumor for breast cancer in other animals
Mouse models of breast cancer metastasis


== References ==


=== Works cited ===
Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al., eds. (2017). "48: Breast". AJCC Cancer Staging Manual (8 ed.). Springer Cham. ISBN 978-3-319-40617-6.
Britt KL, Cuzick J, Phillips KA (August 2020). "Key steps for effective breast cancer prevention". Nat Rev Cancer. 20 (8): 417–436. doi:10.1038/s41568-020-0266-x. PMID 32528185.
Harbeck N, Penault-Llorca F, Cortes J, Gnant M, Houssami N, Poortmans P, et al. (September 2019). "Breast cancer". Nat Rev Dis Primers. 5 (1) 66. doi:10.1038/s41572-019-0111-2. hdl:2123/30163. PMID 31548545.
Hayes DF, Lippman ME (2022). "79: Breast Cancer". In Loscalzo J, Fauci A, Kasper D, et al. (eds.). Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine (21 ed.). McGraw Hill. ISBN 978-1-264-26850-4.
Loibl S, Poortmans P, Morrow M, Denkert C, Curigliano G (May 2021). "Breast cancer". Lancet. 397 (10286): 1750–1769. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32381-3. PMID 33812473.
Menes TS, Coster D, Coster D, Shenhar-Tsarfaty S (October 2021). "Contribution of clinical breast exam to cancer detection in women participating in a modern screening program". BMC Women's Health. 21 (1) 368. doi:10.1186/s12905-021-01507-x. PMC 8524962. PMID 34666735.
Metaxa L, Healy NA, O'Keeffe SA (November 2019). "Breast microcalcifications: the UK RCR 5-point breast imaging system or BI-RADS; which is the better predictor of malignancy?". Br J Radiol. 92 (1103) 20190177. doi:10.1259/bjr.20190177. PMC 6849664. PMID 31365279.
Nielsen S, Narayan AK (February 2023). "Breast Cancer Screening Modalities, Recommendations, and Novel Imaging Techniques". Surg Clin North Am. 103 (1): 63–82. doi:10.1016/j.suc.2022.08.004. PMID 36410354.
Rahman WT, Helvie MA (September 2022). "Breast cancer screening in average and high-risk women". Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 83: 3–14. doi:10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2021.11.007. PMID 34903436.


== External links ==

================================================================================
# Trastuzumab (drug)
# Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trastuzumab
================================================================================

Trastuzumab, sold under the brand name Herceptin among others, is a monoclonal antibody used to treat breast cancer and stomach cancer. It is specifically used for cancer that is HER2 receptor positive. It may be used by itself or together with other chemotherapy medication. Trastuzumab is given by slow injection into a vein and injection just under the skin.
Common side effects include fever, infection, cough, headache, trouble sleeping, and rash. Other severe side effects include heart failure, allergic reactions, and lung disease. Use during pregnancy may harm the baby. Trastuzumab works by binding to the HER2 receptor and slowing down cell replication.
Trastuzumab was approved for medical use in the United States in September 1998, and in the European Union in August 2000. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines.


== Medical uses ==
The safety and efficacy of trastuzumab-containing combination therapies (with chemotherapy, hormone blockers, or lapatinib) for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer. The overall hazard ratios (HR) for overall survival and progression free survival were 0.82 and 0.61, respectively. It was difficult to accurately ascertain the true impact of trastuzumab on survival, as in three of the seven trials, over half of the patients in the control arm were allowed to cross-over and receive trastuzumab after their cancer began to progress. Thus, this analysis likely underestimates the true survival benefit associated with trastuzumab treatment in this population.
In early-stage HER2-positive breast cancer, trastuzumab-containing regimens improved overall survival (Hazard ratio (HR) = 0.66) and disease-free survival (HR = 0.60). Increased risk of heart failure (RR = 5.11) and decline in left ventricular ejection fraction (relative risk RR = 1.83) were seen in these trials as well. Two trials involving shorter term treatment with trastuzumab did not differ in efficacy from longer trials, but produced less cardiac toxicity.
The original studies of trastuzumab showed that it improved overall survival in late-stage (metastatic) HER2-positive breast cancer from 20.3 to 25.1 months. In early-stage HER2-positive breast cancer, it reduces the risk of cancer returning after surgery. The absolute reduction in the risk of cancer returning within three years was 9.5%, and the absolute reduction in the risk of death within 3 years was reduced by 3%. However, it increases serious heart problems by an absolute risk of 2.1%, though the problems may resolve if treatment is stopped.
Trastuzumab has had a "major impact in the treatment of HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer." The combination of trastuzumab with chemotherapy has been shown to increase both survival and response rate, in comparison to trastuzumab alone.
It is possible to determine the "erbB2 status" of a tumor, which can be used to predict efficacy of treatment with trastuzumab. If it is determined that a tumor is overexpressing the erbB2 oncogene and the patient has no significant pre-existing heart disease, then a patient is eligible for treatment with trastuzumab. It is surprising that although trastuzumab has great affinity for HER2 and high doses can be administered (because of its low toxicity), 70% of HER2+ patients do not respond to treatment. In fact resistance to the treatment develops rapidly, in virtually all patients. A mechanism of resistance involves failure to downregulate p27Kip1 as well as suppressing p27 translocation to the nucleus in breast cancer, enabling cdk2 to induce cell proliferation.
In May 2021, the FDA approved pembrolizumab in combination with trastuzumab, fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-containing chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of people with locally advanced unresectable or metastatic HER2 positive gastric or gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) adenocarcinoma.


=== Duration of treatment ===
The optimal duration of add-on trastuzumab treatment after surgery for early breast cancer is unknown. One year of treatment is generally accepted based on clinical trial evidence that demonstrated the superiority of one-year treatment over none. However, a small Finnish trial also showed similar improvement with nine weeks of treatment over no therapy. Because of the lack of direct head-to-head comparison in clinical trials, it is unknown whether a shorter duration of treatment may be just as effective (with fewer side effects) than the accepted practice of treatment for one year. Debate about treatment duration has become a relevant issue for many public health policy makers because administering trastuzumab for a year is very expensive. Consequently, some countries with a taxpayer-funded public health system, such as New Zealand, chose to fund limited adjuvant therapy. However, subsequently New Zealand has revised its policy and now funds trastuzumab treatment for up to 12 months.


== Adverse effects ==
Some of the common side effects of trastuzumab are flu-like symptoms (such as fever, chills and mild pain), nausea and diarrhea.
One of the more serious complications of trastuzumab is its effect on the heart, although this is rare. In 2–7% of cases, trastuzumab is associated with cardiac dysfunction, which includes congestive heart failure. As a result, regular cardiac screening with either a MUGA scan or echocardiography is commonly undertaken during the trastuzumab treatment period. The decline in ejection fraction appears to be reversible.
Trastuzumab downregulates neuregulin-1 (NRG-1), which is essential for the activation of cell survival pathways in cardiomyocytes and the maintenance of cardiac function. NRG-1 activates the MAPK pathway and the PI3K/AKT pathway as well as focal adhesion kinases (FAK). These are all significant for the function and structure of cardiomyocytes. Trastuzumab can therefore lead to cardiac dysfunction.
Trastuzumab may harm a developing fetus.


== Mechanism of action ==

The HER2 gene (also known as HER2/neu and ErbB2 gene) is amplified in 20–30% of early-stage breast cancers. Trastuzumab is a monoclonal antibody targeting HER2, inducing an immune-mediated response that causes internalization and recycling of HER2. It may also upregulate cell cycle inhibitors such as p21Waf1 and p27Kip1.
The HER2 pathway promotes cell growth and division when it is functioning normally; however, when it is overexpressed, cell growth accelerates beyond its normal limits. In some types of cancer, the pathway is exploited to promote rapid cell growth and proliferation and hence tumor formation. The EGF pathway includes the receptors HER1 (EGFR), HER2, HER3, and HER4; the binding of ligands (e.g. EGF etc.) to HER receptors is required to activate the pathway. The pathway initiates the MAP kinase pathway as well as the PI3 kinase/AKT pathway, which in turn activates the NF-κB pathway. In cancer cells the HER2 protein can be expressed up to 100 times more than in normal cells (2 million versus 20,000 per cell).
The HER receptors are proteins that are embedded in the cell membrane and communicate molecular signals from outside the cell (molecules called EGFs) to inside the cell, and turn genes on and off. The HER (human epidermal growth factor receptor) protein, binds to human epidermal growth factor, and stimulates cell proliferation. In some cancers, notably certain types of breast cancer, HER2 is over-expressed and causes cancer cells to reproduce uncontrollably.
HER2 is localized at the cell surface, and carries signals from outside the cell to the inside. Signaling compounds called mitogens (specifically EGF in this case) arrive at the cell membrane, and bind to the extracellular domain of the HER family of receptors. Those bound proteins then link (dimerize), activating the receptor. HER2 sends a signal from its intracellular domain, activating several different biochemical pathways. These include the PI3K/Akt pathway and the MAPK pathway. Signals on these pathways promote cell proliferation and the growth of blood vessels to nourish the tumor (angiogenesis). ERBB2 is the preferred dimerization partner for the other family members and ERBB2 heterodimers signaling is stronger and longer acting compared to heterodimers between other ERBB members. It has been reported that Trastuzumab induces the formation of complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) leading to surface redistribution of ERBB2 and EGFR in CDRs and that the ERBB2-dependent MAPK phosphorylation and EGFR/ERBB1 expression are both required for CDR formation. CDR formation requires activation of both the protein regulator of actin polymerization N-WASP, mediated by ERK1/2, and of the actin-depolymerizing protein cofilin, mediated by EGFR/ERBB1. Furthermore, this latter event may be inhibited by the negative cell motility regulator p140Cap, as we found that p140Cap overexpression led to cofilin deactivation and inhibition of CDR formation.
Normal cell division—mitosis—has checkpoints that keep cell division under control. Some of the proteins that control this cycle are called cdk2 (CDKs). Overexpression of HER2 sidesteps these checkpoints, causing cells to proliferate in an uncontrolled fashion.
Trastuzumab binds to domain IV of the extracellular segment of the HER2/neu receptor. Monoclonal antibodies that bind to this region have been shown to reverse the phenotype of HER2/neu expressing tumor cells. Cells treated with trastuzumab undergo arrest during the G1 phase of the cell cycle so there is reduced proliferation. It has been suggested that trastuzumab does not alter HER-2 expression, but downregulates activation of AKT. In addition, trastuzumab suppresses angiogenesis both by induction of antiangiogenic factors and repression of proangiogenic factors. It is thought that a contribution to the unregulated growth observed in cancer could be due to proteolytic cleavage of HER2/neu that results in the release of the extracellular domain. One of the most relevant proteins that trastuzumab activates is the tumor suppressor p27Kip1, also known as CDKN1B. Trastuzumab has been shown to inhibit HER2/neu ectodomain cleavage in breast cancer cells.
Experiments in laboratory animals indicate that antibodies, including trastuzumab, when bound to a cell, induce immune cells to kill that cell, and that such antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity is another important mechanism of action.


== Predicting response ==
Trastuzumab inhibits the effects of overexpression of HER2. If the breast cancer does not overexpress HER2, trastuzumab will have no beneficial effect (and may cause harm). Doctors use laboratory tests to discover whether HER2 is overexpressed. In the routine clinical laboratory, the most commonly employed methods for this are immunohistochemistry (IHC) and either silver, chromogenic or fluorescent in situ hybridisation (SISH/CISH/FISH). HER2 amplification can be detected by virtual karyotyping of formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tumor. Virtual karyotyping has the added advantage of assessing copy number changes throughout the genome, in addition to detecting HER-2 amplification (but not overexpression). Numerous PCR-based methodologies have also been described in the literature. It is also possible to estimate HER2 copy number from microarray data.
There are two FDA-approved commercial kits available for HER2 IHC; Dako HercepTest and Ventana Pathway.
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) is viewed as being the "gold standard" technique in identifying patients who would benefit from trastuzumab, but it is expensive and requires fluorescence microscopy and an image capture system. The main expense involved with CISH is in the purchase of FDA-approved kits, and as it is not a fluorescent technique it does not require specialist microscopy and slides may be kept permanently. Comparative studies of CISH and FISH have shown that these two techniques show excellent correlation. The lack of a separate chromosome 17 probe on the same section is an issue with regards to acceptance of CISH. As of June 2011 Roche has obtained FDA approval for the INFORM HER2 Dual ISH DNA Probe cocktail  developed by Ventana Medical Systems. The DDISH (Dual-chromagen/Dual-hapten In-situ hybridization) cocktail uses both HER2 and Chromosome 17 hybridization probes for chromagenic visualization on the same tissue section. The detection can be achieved by using a combination of ultraView SISH(silver in-situ hybridization) and ultraView Red ISH for deposition of distinct chromgenic precipitates at the site of DNP or DIG labeled probes.


== Resistance ==
One of the challenges in the treatment of breast cancer patients by herceptin is our understanding towards herceptin resistance. In the last decade, several assays have been performed to understand the mechanism of Herceptin resistance with/without supplementary drugs. Recently, all this information has been collected and compiled in form of a database HerceptinR.


== History ==
The drug was first discovered by scientists including Axel Ullrich and H. Michael Shepard at Genentech, Inc. in South San Francisco, CA. Earlier discovery about the neu oncogene by Robert Weinberg's lab  and the monoclonal antibody recognizing the oncogenic receptor by Mark Greene's lab  also contributed to the establishment of HER2 targeted therapies. Dr. Dennis Slamon subsequently worked on trastuzumab's development. A book about Dr. Slamon's work was made into a television film called Living Proof, that premiered in 2008. Genentech developed trastuzumab jointly with UCLA, beginning the first clinical trial with 15 women in 1992. By 1996, clinical trials had expanded to over 900 women, but due to pressure from advocates based on early success, Genentech worked with the FDA to begin a lottery system allowing 100 women each quarter access to the medication outside the trials. Herceptin was Fast-tracked by the FDA and gained approval in September 1998.
Biocon Ltd and its partner Mylan obtained regulatory approval to sell a biosimilar in 2014, but Roche contested the legality of the approval; that litigation ended in 2016, and Biocon and Mylan each introduced their own branded biosimilars.


== Society and culture ==


=== Economics ===
Trastuzumab costs about US$70,000 for a full course of treatment.
Australia has negotiated a lower price of A$50,000 per course of treatment.
Since October 2006, trastuzumab has been made available for Australian women and men with early-stage breast cancer via the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. This is estimated to cost the country over A$470 million for 4–5 years supply of the drug.
Roche has agreed with Emcure in India to make an affordable version of this cancer drug available to the Indian market.
Roche has changed the brand name of the drug and has re-introduced an affordable version of the same in the Indian market. The new drug named Herclon would cost approximately RS75,000 INR (US$ 870)  in the Indian market.
On 16 September 2014, Genentech notified hospitals in the United States that, as of October, trastuzumab could only be purchased through their selected specialty drugs distributors not through the usual general line wholesalers. By being forced to purchase through specialty pharmacies, hospitals lost rebates from the big wholesalers and the ability to negotiate cost-minus discounts with their wholesalers.


=== Biosimilars ===

By 2014, around 20 companies, particularly from emerging markets, were developing biosimilar versions of trastuzumab
after Roche/Genentech's patents expired in 2014 in Europe, and in 2019 in the United States.
In January 2015, BIOCAD announced the first trastuzumab biosimilar approved by the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation. Iran also approved its own version of the monoclonal antibody in January 2016, as AryoTrust, and announced its readiness to export the drug to other countries in the Middle-East and Central Asia when trade sanctions were lifted.
In 2016, the investigational biosimilar MYL-1401O showed comparable efficacy and safety to the Herceptin branded trastuzumab. Trastuzumab-dkst (Ogivri, Mylan GmbH) was approved in the United States in December 2017, to "treat people with breast cancer or gastric or gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma whose tumors overexpress the HER-2 gene." Ogivri was authorized for medical use in the European Union in December 2018.
In November 2017, the European Commission authorized Ontruzant, a biosimilar from Samsung Bioepis Co., Ltd, for the treatment of early breast cancer, metastatic breast cancer and metastatic gastric cancer. Ontruzant is the first trastuzumab biosimilar to receive regulatory approval in the European Union.
Herzuma was authorized for medical use in the European Union in February 2018. Herzuma, a trastuzumab biosimilar, was approved in the United States in December 2018. The approval was based on comparisons of extensive structural and functional product characterization, animal data, human pharmacokinetic, clinical immunogenicity, and other clinical data demonstrating that Herzuma is biosimilar to US Herceptin. Herzuma has been approved as a biosimilar, not as an interchangeable product.
Kanjinti was authorized for medical use in the European Union in May 2018.
Trazimera was authorized for medical use in the European Union in July 2018.
Ogivri was approved for medical use in Canada in May 2019.
Trazimera was approved for medical use in Canada in August 2019.
Herzuma was approved for medical use in Canada in September 2019.
Kanjinti was approved for medical use in Canada in February 2020.
Zercepac was authorized for medical use in the European Union in July 2020.
Trastucip and Tuzucip were approved for medical use in Australia in July 2022.
In September 2023, the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) of the European Medicines Agency adopted a positive opinion, recommending the granting of a marketing authorization for the medicinal product Herwenda, intended for the treatment of HER2-positive breast and gastric cancer. The applicant for this medicinal product is Sandoz GmbH. Herwenda was authorized for medical use in the European Union in November 2023.
Trastuzumab-strf (Hercessi) was approved for medical use in the United States in April 2024.
In July 2024, the CHMP adopted a positive opinion, recommending the granting of a marketing authorization for the medicinal product Tuznue, intended for the treatment of breast and gastric cancer. The applicant for this medicinal product is Prestige Biopharma Belgium BVBA. Tuznue is a biosimilar medicinal product. Tuznue was authorized for medical use in the European Union in September 2024.
Adheroza was approved for medical use in Canada in August 2024.
In April 2025, the CHMP adopted a positive opinion, recommending the granting of a marketing authorization for the medicinal product Dazublys, intended for the treatment of breast and gastric cancer. The applicant for this medicinal product is CuraTeQ Biologics s.r.o. Dazublys is a biosimilar medicinal product that is highly similar to the reference product Herceptin (trastuzumab), which was authorized in the EU in August 2000. Dazublys was authorized for medical use in the EU in June 2025.


=== Related conjugates ===
Trastuzumab is also a component of some antibody-drug conjugates, such as trastuzumab emtansine, and trastuzumab deruxtecan.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Bazell R (1998). Her-2: the making of Herceptin, a revolutionary treatment for breast cancer (1st ed.). New York: Random House. ISBN 0-679-45702-X.
Boseley S (29 March 2006). "The selling of a wonder drug". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 13 December 2019. Retrieved 13 December 2019.
Dent S, Verma S, Latreille J, Rayson D, Clemons M, Mackey J, et al. (August 2009). "The role of HER2-targeted therapies in women with HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer". Current Oncology. 16 (4): 25–35. doi:10.3747/co.v16i4.469. PMC 2722050. PMID 19672422.
Dean L (2015). "Trastuzumab (Herceptin) Therapy and ERBB2 (HER2) Genotype". In Pratt VM, McLeod HL, Rubinstein WS, et al. (eds.). Medical Genetics Summaries. National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). PMID 28520362. Bookshelf ID: NBK310376. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 5 February 2020.


== External links ==

"Trastuzumab". National Cancer Institute. 5 October 2006.

================================================================================
# Imatinib (drug)
# Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imatinib
================================================================================

Imatinib, sold under the brand names Gleevec and Glivec (both marketed worldwide by Novartis) among others, is an oral targeted therapy medication used to treat cancer. Imatinib is a small molecule inhibitor targeting multiple tyrosine kinases such as CSF1R, ABL, c-KIT, FLT3, and PDGFR-β. Specifically, it is used for chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) and acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) that are Philadelphia chromosome–positive (Ph+), certain types of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST), hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES), chronic eosinophilic leukemia (CEL), systemic mastocytosis, and myelodysplastic syndrome.
Common side effects include vomiting, diarrhea, muscle pain, headache, and rash. Severe side effects may include fluid retention, gastrointestinal bleeding, bone marrow suppression, liver problems, and heart failure. Use during pregnancy may result in harm to the baby. Imatinib works by stopping the Bcr-Abl tyrosine-kinase. This can slow growth or result in programmed cell death of certain types of cancer cells.
Imatinib was approved for medical use in the United States in 2001. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. A generic version became available in the UK as of 2017.


== Medical uses ==
Imatinib is used to treat chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) and a number of other malignancies. In 2006 the FDA expanded approved use to include dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP), myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative diseases (MDS/MPD), and aggressive systemic mastocytosis (ASM).
Imatinib is considered to be a very effective treatment for CML, and has been shown to improve outcomes for people with this type of leukemia. It can also be used to treat some types of ALL, but is not considered a standard of care for ALL. In many cases, imatinib can induce a complete cytogenetic response (CCyR) and major molecular response (MMR) and many patients can have a long-term remission. It is also used to maintain remission in chronic phase CML patients.
While imatinib is a very effective treatment for CML and some types of ALL, it is not a cure for leukemia. Instead, it is a 'chronic therapy' that helps to control the disease and prevent it from progressing. Some patients may need to continue taking imatinib for an extended period of time to maintain remission, and some patients may eventually require additional treatment options.


=== Chronic myelogenous leukemia ===
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved imatinib as first-line treatment for Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML, both in adults and children. The drug is approved in multiple contexts of Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML, including after stem cell transplant, in blast crisis, newly diagnosed, and accelerated phase.
Due in part to the development of imatinib and related drugs, the five-year survival rate for people with chronic myeloid leukemia increased from 31% in 1993, to 59% in 2009, to 70% in 2016. By 2023, the five year survival rate for people with chronic myeloid leukemia had risen to 90%. Starting from 2011, it became clear that CML patients who continue to respond to imatinib have the same or almost the same life expectancy as the general population.


=== Gastrointestinal stromal tumors ===
The FDA first granted approval for advanced GIST patients in 2002. On 1 February 2012, imatinib was approved for use after the surgical removal of KIT-positive tumors to help prevent recurrence. The drug is also approved in unresectable KIT-positive GISTs.


=== Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) ===
The FDA granted approval for the treatment of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) patients in 2006. Specifically adult patients with unresectable, recurrent and/or metastatic dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP). Prior to approval DFSP was considered unresponsive to chemotherapy treatments.


=== Other ===
The FDA has approved imatinib for use in adults with relapsed or refractory Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL), myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative diseases associated with platelet-derived growth factor receptor gene rearrangements, aggressive systemic mastocytosis without or an unknown D816V c-KIT mutation, hypereosinophilic syndrome and/or chronic eosinophilic leukemia who have the FIP1L1-PDGFRα fusion kinase (CHIC2 allele deletion) or FIP1L1-PDGFRα fusion kinase negative or unknown, unresectable, recurrent and/or metastatic dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. On 25 January 2013, Gleevec was approved for use in children with Ph+ ALL.
For treatment of progressive plexiform neurofibromas associated with neurofibromatosis type I, early research has shown potential for using the c-KIT tyrosine kinase blocking properties of imatinib. There have been several phase 2 trials of imatinib for aggressive fibromatosis.


== Contraindications and cautions ==
The only known contraindication to imatinib is hypersensitivity to imatinib. Cautions include:

Hepatic impairment
Risk of severe CHF or left ventricular dysfunction, especially in patients with comorbidities
Pregnancy, risk of embryo-fetal toxicity
Risk of fluid retention
Risk of growth stunting in children or adolescents


== Side effects ==

The most common side effects include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headaches, leg aches/cramps, fluid retention, visual disturbances, itchy rash, lowered resistance to infection, bruising or bleeding, loss of appetite, weight gain, reduced number of blood cells (neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, anemia), and edema.


=== Cardiotoxicity ===
In some individuals, imatinib use was reported to be associated with left ventricular dysfunction which sometimes progressed to congestive cardiac failure despite an absence of prior heart disease. Clinical trials of imatinib did not report cardiac adverse effects, but had reported a notably high incidence of peripheral oedema (edema), with some cases classified as severe.
Patient biopsies as well as mice treated with large doses of imatinib exhibited cellular signs of cardiotoxicity. Studies determined a potential pathway that led to cardiotoxicity, stemming from a stress response within the endoplasmic reticulum and the effects of c-ABL inhibition. Cardiotoxic effects appeared to mediated by inhibition of cytoplasmic ABL1 tyrosine kinase.


=== Childhood growth inhibition ===
Multiple human and animal studies suggest that if imatinib is used in prepubescent children, it may delay normal growth (more specifically bone elongation), although some may experience at least partial catch-up growth during puberty.
The reason for this side effect is unclear; interference with a growth hormone (GH)-related pathway may be involved (prepubertal growth is GH-dependent, whereas pubertal growth is synergystically promoted by both GH and sex hormones).


=== Pigmentation changes ===
Imatinib use may cause lightening/depigmentation or darkening/repigmentation of hair (as is the case with some other tyrosine kinase inhibitors) and/or skin as well as hyperpigmentation of the gingiva. The median onset of hair color change is 4 weeks after initiation of therapy (but may occur over a year after initiation), is dose-dependent, and is reversible upon treatment discontinuation or dose reduction.
C-kit receptors - one of the biological target of imatinib - are expressed by melanocytes.


=== Hepatotoxicity ===
Both mild and severe hepatotoxicity can occur. 5% of patients developed mild hepatotoxicity within the first 2 years of beginning treatment. However, severe hepatotoxicity is rare. Both severe and mild hepatotoxicity can be reversed by either stopping treatment or reducing the dosage of imatinib.


== Overdose ==
Medical experience with imatinib overdose is limited. Treatment is supportive. Imatinib is highly plasma protein-bound: dialysis is unlikely to be helpful removing imatinib.


== Interactions ==
Its use is advised against in people on strong CYP3A4 inhibitors such as clarithromycin, chloramphenicol, ketoconazole, ritonavir and nefazodone due to its reliance on CYP3A4 for metabolism. Likewise it is a CYP3A4, CYP2D6 and CYP2C9 inhibitor and hence concurrent treatment with substrates of any of these enzymes may increase plasma concentrations of said drugs. Since imatinib is mainly metabolised via the liver enzyme CYP3A4, substances influencing the activity of this enzyme change the plasma concentration of the drug. An example of a drug that increases imatinib activity and therefore side effects by blocking CYP3A4 is ketoconazole. The same could be true of itraconazole, clarithromycin, grapefruit juice, among others. Conversely, CYP3A4 inductors like rifampicin and St John's Wort reduce the drug's activity, risking therapy failure. Imatinib also acts as an inhibitor of CYP3A4, 2C9 and 2D6, increasing the plasma concentrations of a number of other drugs like simvastatin, ciclosporin, pimozide, warfarin, metoprolol, and possibly paracetamol. The drug also reduces plasma levels of levothyroxin via an unknown mechanism.
As with other immunosuppressants, application of live vaccines is contraindicated because the microorganisms in the vaccine could multiply and infect the patient. Inactivated and toxoid vaccines do not hold this risk, but may not be effective under imatinib therapy.
Eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice are strongly discouraged as it increases the concentration of imatinib in the blood.


== Pharmacology ==


=== Mechanism of action ===

Imatinib is a 2-phenyl amino pyrimidine derivative that functions as a specific inhibitor of a number of tyrosine kinase enzymes. It occupies the TK active site, leading to a decrease in activity.
There are a large number of TK enzymes in the body, including the insulin receptor. Imatinib is specific for the TK domain in abl (the Abelson proto-oncogene), c-kit and PDGF-R (platelet-derived growth factor receptor).
In chronic myelogenous leukemia, the Philadelphia chromosome leads to a fusion protein of abl with bcr (breakpoint cluster region), termed bcr-abl. As this is now a constitutively active tyrosine kinase, imatinib is used to decrease bcr-abl activity.
The active sites of tyrosine kinases each have a binding site for ATP. The enzymatic activity catalyzed by a tyrosine kinase is the transfer of the terminal phosphate from ATP to tyrosine residues on its substrates, a process known as protein tyrosine phosphorylation. Imatinib works by binding close to the ATP binding site of bcr-abl, locking it in a closed or self-inhibited conformation, and therefore inhibiting the enzyme activity of the protein semi-competitively. This fact explains why many BCR-ABL mutations can cause resistance to imatinib by shifting its equilibrium toward the open or active conformation.
Imatinib is quite selective for bcr-abl, though it does also inhibit other targets mentioned above (c-kit and PDGF-R), as well as ABL2 (ARG) and DDR1 tyrosine kinases and NQO2 – an oxidoreductase. Imatinib also inhibits the abl protein of non-cancer cells, but these cells normally have additional redundant tyrosine kinases, which allows them to continue to function even if abl tyrosine kinase is inhibited. Some tumor cells, however, have a dependence on bcr-abl. Inhibition of the bcr-abl tyrosine kinase also stimulates its entry in to the nucleus, where it is unable to perform any of its normal anti-apoptopic functions, leading to tumor cell death.


==== Other pathways affected ====
The Bcr-Abl pathway has many downstream pathways including

the Ras/MapK pathway, which leads to increased proliferation due to increased growth factor-independent cell growth.
It also affects the Src/Pax/Fak/Rac pathway. This affects the cytoskeleton, which leads to increased cell motility and decreased adhesion.
The PI/PI3K/AKT/BCL-2 pathway is also affected. BCL-2 is responsible for keeping the mitochondria stable; this suppresses cell death by apoptosis and increases survival.
The last pathway that Bcr-Abl affects is the JAK/STAT pathway, which is responsible for proliferation.


=== Pharmacokinetics ===
Imatinib is rapidly absorbed when given by mouth, and is highly bioavailable: 98% of an oral dose reaches the bloodstream. Metabolism of imatinib occurs in the liver and is mediated by several isozymes of the cytochrome P450 system, including CYP3A4 and, to a lesser extent, CYP1A2, CYP2D6, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19. The main metabolite, N-demethylated piperazine derivative, is also active. The major route of elimination is in the bile and feces; only a small portion of the drug is excreted in the urine. Most of imatinib is eliminated as metabolites; only 25% is eliminated unchanged. The half-lives of imatinib and its main metabolite are 18 h and 40 h, respectively. It blocks the activity of Abelson cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase (ABL), c-Kit and the platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR). As an inhibitor of PDGFR, imatinib mesylate appears to have utility in the treatment of a variety of dermatological diseases. Imatinib has been reported to be an effective treatment for FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha+ mast cell disease, hypereosinophilic syndrome, and dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans.


== Chemistry ==


=== Synthesis ===


== History ==
Imatinib was invented in the early 1990s (the first patent application took place in 1994) by scientists at Ciba-Geigy (which merged with Sandoz in 1996 to become Novartis), in a team led by the British biochemist Nicholas Lydon and that included Elisabeth Buchdunger and Jürg Zimmermann, and its use to treat CML was driven by oncologist Brian Druker of Oregon Health & Science University (OHSU). Other major contributions to imatinib development were made by biologist Anthony R. Hunter at Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, California, Carlo Gambacorti-Passerini, a physician, scientist, and hematologist at the University of Milano Bicocca, Italy, John Goldman at Hammersmith Hospital in London, and later on by Charles Sawyers of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
Imatinib was developed by rational drug design. After the Philadelphia chromosome mutation and hyperactive bcr-abl protein were discovered, the investigators screened chemical libraries to find a drug that would inhibit that protein. With high-throughput screening, they identified 2-phenylaminopyrimidine. This lead compound was then tested and modified by the introduction of methyl and benzamide groups to give it enhanced binding properties, resulting in imatinib.
When Novartis tested imatinib in rats, mice, rabbits, dogs, and monkeys in 1996, it was found to have several toxic effects; in particular, results indicating liver damage in dogs nearly stopped drug development completely. However, favorable results in studies with monkeys and in vitro human cells allowed testing to continue in humans.
The first clinical trial of Gleevec took place in 1998, after Novartis reluctantly synthesized and released a few grams of the drug for Druker, enough for him to run a trial using a hundred or so patients. Mel Mann, who entered the clinical trial in August 1998, is the longest living person to be treated with the drug.  The drug received FDA approval in May 2001, only two and a half years after the new drug application was submitted. On the same month it made the cover of TIME magazine as a "bullet" to be used against cancer. Druker, Lydon and Sawyers received the Lasker-DeBakey Clinical Medical Research Award in 2009 for "converting a fatal cancer into a manageable chronic condition".
During the FDA review, the tradename of the drug for the US market was changed from "Glivec" to "Gleevec" at the request of the FDA, to avoid confusion with Glyset, a diabetes drug.
A Swiss patent application was filed on imatinib and various salts on in April 1992, which was then filed in the EU, the US, and other countries in March and April 1993. and in 1996 United States and European patent offices issued patents listing Jürg Zimmermann as the inventor.
In July 1997, Novartis filed a new patent application in Switzerland on the beta crystalline form of imatinib mesylate (the mesylate salt of imatinib).  The "beta crystalline form" of the molecule is a specific polymorph of imatinib mesylate; a specific way that the individual molecules pack together to form a solid.  This is the actual form of the drug sold as Gleevec/Glivec; a salt (imatinib mesylate) as opposed to a free base, and the beta crystalline form as opposed to the alpha or other form.  In 1998, Novartis filed international patent applications claiming priority to the 1997 filing. A United States patent was granted in 2005.


== Society and culture ==


=== Economics ===

In 2013, more than 100 cancer specialists published a letter in Blood saying that the prices of many new cancer drugs, including imatinib, are so high that people in the United States could not afford them, and that the level of prices, and profits, was so high as to be immoral. Signatories of the letter included Brian Druker, Carlo Gambacorti-Passerini, and John Goldman, developers of imatinib. They wrote that in 2001, imatinib was priced at $30,000 (equivalent to $54,548 in 2025) a year, which was based on the price of interferon, then the standard treatment, and that at this price Novartis would have recouped its initial development costs in two years.  They wrote that after unexpectedly becoming a blockbuster, Novartis increased the price to $92,000 (equivalent to $129,019 in 2025) per year in 2012, with annual revenues of $4.7 billion. Other physicians have complained about the cost.
Druker, who led the clinical studies, never received any royalties or profits from the success of the drug.
By 2016, the average wholesale price had increased to $120,000 (equivalent to $160,982 in 2025) a year, according to an analysis prepared for The Washington Post by Stacie Dusetzina of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. When competitive drugs came on the market, they were sold at a higher price to reflect the smaller population, and Novartis raised the price of Gleevec to match them.
A 2012 economic analysis funded by Bristol-Myers Squibb estimated that the discovery and development of imatinib and related drugs had created $143 billion in societal value at a cost to consumers of approximately $14 billion.  The $143 billion figure was based on an estimated 7.5 to 17.5 year survival advantage conferred by imatinib treatment, and included the value (discounted at 3% per annum) of ongoing benefits to society after the imatinib patent expiration.
Prices for a 100 mg pill of Gleevec internationally range from $20 to $30, although generic imatinib is cheaper, as low as $2 per pill.


=== Controversies ===


==== Patent litigation in India ====

Novartis fought a seven-year, controversial battle to patent Gleevec in India, and took the case all the way to the Indian Supreme Court.  The patent application at the center of the case was filed by Novartis in India in 1998, after India had agreed to enter the World Trade Organization and to abide by worldwide intellectual property standards under the TRIPS agreement.  As part of this agreement, India made changes to its patent law, the biggest of which was that prior to these changes, patents on products were not allowed, while afterwards they were, albeit with restrictions.  These changes came into effect in 2005, so Novartis' patent application waited in a "mailbox" with others until then, under procedures that India instituted to manage the transition.  India also passed certain amendments to its patent law in 2005, just before the laws came into effect.
The patent application claimed the final form of Gleevec (the beta crystalline form of imatinib mesylate).  In 1993, during the time India did not allow patents on products, Novartis had patented imatinib, with salts vaguely specified, in many countries but could not patent it in India. The key differences between the two patent applications, were that 1998 patent application specified the counterion (Gleevec is a specific salt – imatinib mesylate) while the 1993 patent application did not claim any specific salts nor did it mention mesylate, and the 1998 patent application specified the solid form of Gleevec – the way the individual molecules are packed together into a solid when the drug itself is manufactured (this is separate from processes by which the drug itself is formulated into pills or capsules) – while the 1993 patent application did not.  The solid form of imatinib mesylate in Gleevec is beta crystalline.
As provided under the TRIPS agreement, Novartis applied for Exclusive Marketing Rights (EMR) for Gleevec from the Indian Patent Office and the EMR was granted in November 2003. Novartis made use of the EMR to obtain orders against some generic manufacturers who had already launched Gleevec in India.
When examination of Novartis' patent application began in 2005, it came under immediate attack from oppositions initiated by generic companies that were already selling Gleevec in India and by advocacy groups.  The application was rejected by the patent office and by an appeal board.  The key basis for the rejection was the part of Indian patent law that was created by amendment in 2005, describing the patentability of new uses for known drugs and modifications of known drugs.  That section, 3d, specified that such inventions are patentable only if "they differ significantly in properties with regard to efficacy." At one point, Novartis went to court to try to invalidate Section 3d; it argued that the provision was unconstitutionally vague and that it violated TRIPS.  Novartis lost that case and did not appeal. Novartis did appeal the rejection by the patent office to India's Supreme Court, which took the case.
The Supreme Court case hinged on the interpretation of Section 3d.  The Supreme Court issued its decision in 2013, ruling that the substance that Novartis sought to patent was indeed a modification of a known drug (the raw form of imatinib, which was publicly disclosed in the 1993 patent application and in scientific articles), that Novartis did not present evidence of a difference in therapeutic efficacy between the final form of Gleevec and the raw form of imatinib, and that therefore the patent application was properly rejected by the patent office and lower courts.


== Research ==
One study demonstrated that imatinib mesylate was effective in patients with systemic mastocytosis, including those who had the D816V mutation in c-KIT. However, since imatinib binds to tyrosine kinases when they are in the inactive configuration and the D816V mutant of c-KIT is constitutively active, imatinib does not inhibit the kinase activity of the D816V mutant of c-KIT.  Experience has shown, however, that imatinib is much less effective in patients with this mutation, and patients with the mutation comprise nearly 90% of cases of mastocytosis.
Imatinib was initially thought to have a potential role in the treatment of pulmonary hypertension. It was shown to reduce both the smooth muscle hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the pulmonary vasculature in a variety of disease processes, including portopulmonary hypertension. However, a long-term trial of Imatinib in people with pulmonary arterial hypertension was unsuccessful, and serious and unexpected adverse events were frequent. These included 6 subdural hematomas and 17 deaths during or within 30 days of study end.
In systemic sclerosis, the drug has been tested for potential use in slowing down pulmonary fibrosis. In laboratory settings, imatinib is being used as an experimental agent to suppress platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) by inhibiting its receptor (PDGF-Rβ). One of its effects is delaying atherosclerosis in mice without or with diabetes.
Mouse animal studies have suggested that imatinib and related drugs may be useful in treating smallpox, should an outbreak ever occur.
In vitro studies identified that a modified version of imatinib can bind to gamma-secretase activating protein (GSAP). GSAP selectively increases the production and accumulation of neurotoxic beta-amyloid plaques, which suggests that molecules which target GSAP and are able to cross blood–brain barrier are potential therapeutic agents for treating Alzheimer's disease. Another study suggests that imatinib may not need to cross the blood–brain barrier to be effective at treating Alzheimer's, as the research indicates the production of beta-amyloid may begin in the liver. Tests on mice indicate that imatinib is effective at reducing beta-amyloid in the brain. It is not known whether reduction of beta-amyloid is a feasible way of treating Alzheimer's, as an anti-beta-amyloid vaccine has been shown to clear the brain of plaques without having any effect on Alzheimer symptoms.
A formulation of imatinib with a cyclodextrin (Captisol) as a carrier to overcome the blood–brain barrier has shown reversal of opioid tolerance in a 2012 study in rats.
Imatinib is an experimental drug in the treatment of desmoid tumor or aggressive fibromatosis.
Imatinib has also been investigated as a potential therapy for Duchenne-Meryon muscular dystrophy. In early mdx mouse research, imatinib was shown to decrease inflammation, muscle necrosis, and fibrosis while increasing grip strength.


== Etymology ==
The -tinib word stem makes reference to the drug's action as a tyrosine kinase (TYK) inhibitor.


== References ==


== External links ==
"Imatinib mesylate". National Cancer Institute. 5 October 2006.

================================================================================
# EZH2 (gene)
# Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EZH2
================================================================================

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a histone-lysine N-methyltransferase enzyme (EC 2.1.1.43) encoded by EZH2 gene, that participates in histone methylation and, ultimately, transcriptional repression. EZH2 catalyzes the addition of methyl groups to histone H3 at lysine 27, by using the cofactor S-adenosyl-L-methionine. Methylation activity of EZH2 facilitates heterochromatin formation thereby silences gene function. Remodeling of chromosomal heterochromatin by EZH2 is also required during cell mitosis.
EZH2 is the functional enzymatic component of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2), which is responsible for healthy embryonic development through the epigenetic maintenance of genes responsible for regulating development and differentiation. EZH2 is responsible for the methylation activity of PRC2, and the complex also contains proteins required for optimal function (EED, SUZ12, JARID2, AEBP2, RbAp46/48, and PCL).
Mutation or over-expression of EZH2 has been linked to many forms of cancer. EZH2 inhibits genes responsible for suppressing tumor development, and blocking EZH2 activity may slow tumor growth. EZH2 has been targeted for inhibition because it is upregulated in multiple cancers including, but not limited to, breast, prostate, melanoma, and bladder cancer. Mutations in the EZH2 gene are also associated with Weaver syndrome, a rare congenital disorder, and EZH2 is involved in causing neurodegenerative symptoms in the nervous system disorder, ataxia telangiectasia.


== Function ==

EZH2 is the catalytic subunit of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2).  EZH2's catalytic activity relies on its formation of a complex with at least two other PRC2 components, SUZ12 and EED.  
 
As a histone methyltransferase (HMTase), EZH2's primary function is to methylate Lys-27 on histone 3 (H3K27me) by transferring a methyl group from the cofactor S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM). EZH2 is capable of mono-, di-, and tri-methylation of H3K27 and has been associated with a variety of biological functions, including transcriptional regulation in hematopoiesis, development, and cell differentiation.
EZH2 has also been identified as capable of methylating non-histone proteins.


=== Transcription repression ===
EZH2, as a part of PRC2, catalyzes trimethylation of H3K27 (H3K27me3), which is a histone modification that has been characterized as part of the histone code. The histone code is the theory that chemical modifications, such as methylation, acetylation, and ubiquitination, of histone proteins play distinctive roles in epigenetic regulation of gene transcription. EZH2-mediated catalysis of H3K27me3 is associated with long term transcription repression.
EZH2, as well as other Polycomb group proteins, are involved in establishing and maintaining gene repression through cell division. This transcriptionally repressive state is thought to be due to PRC2/EZH2-EED-mediated H3K27 methylation and subsequent recruitment of PRC1 which facilitates condensation of chromatin and formation of heterochromatin. Heterochromatin is tightly packed chromatin which limits the accessibility of transcription machinery to the underlying DNA, thereby suppressing transcription.
During cell division, heterochromatin formation is required for proper chromosome segregation. PRC2/EED-EZH2 complex may also be involved in the recruitment of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), which results in increased DNA methylation, another epigenetic layer of transcription repression. Specific genes that have been identified as targets of EZH2-mediated transcriptional repression include HOXA9, HOXC8, MYT1, CDKN2A and retinoic acid target genes.


=== Transcription activation ===
In cancer, EZH2 may play a role in activation of transcription, independently of PRC2. In breast cancer cells, EZH2 has been demonstrated to activate NF-κB target genes, which are involved in responses to stimuli. The functional role of this activity and its mechanism are still unknown.


=== Development and cell differentiation ===
EZH2 plays an essential role in development. In particular, it helps control transcriptional repression of genes that regulate cell differentiation. In embryonic stem cells, EZH2-mediated trimethylation of H3K27me3 in regions containing developmental genes appears to be important for maintenance of normal cell differentiation. H3K27me3 is also important in driving X-inactivation, the silencing of one X-chromosome in females during development. During X-inactivation, it is thought that EZH2 is involved in initiating heterochromatin formation by trimethylating H3K27 and that other histone methyltransferases and histone marks may be involved in maintaining the silenced state.
Further, EZH2 has been identified as an essential protein involved in development and differentiation of B-cells and T-cells. H3K27me3 is involved in suppressing genes that promote differentiation, thus maintaining an undifferentiated state of B- and T-cells and playing an important role in regulating hematopoiesis.


=== Regulation of EZH2 activity ===
The activity of EZH2 is regulated by the post-translational phosphorylation of threonine and serine residues on EZH2. Specifically, phosphorylation of T350 has been linked to an increase in EZH2 activity while phosphorylation of T492 and S21 have been linked to a decrease in EZH2 activity. Phosphorylation of T492 has been suggested to disrupt contacts between human EZH2 and its binding partners in the PRC2 complex, thus hindering its catalytic activity.
In addition to phosphorylation, it has also been shown that PRC2/EZH2-EED activity is antagonized by transcription-activating histone marks, such as acetylation of H3K27 (H3K27ac) and methylation of H3K36 (H3K36me).
EZH2 expression is regulated by estrogen signaling in human normal breast epithelium and human breast cancers.


== Enzymatic activity ==
EZH2 function is highly dependent upon its recruitment by the PRC2 complex. In particular, WD40-repeat protein embryonic ectoderm development (EED) and zinc finger protein suppressor of zeste 12 (SUZ12) are needed to stabilize the interaction of EZH2 with its histone substrate Recently, two isoforms of EZH2 generated from alternative splicing have been identified in humans: EZH2α and EZH2β. Both isoforms contain elements that have been identified as important for EZH2 function including the nuclear localization signal, the EED and SUZ12 binding sites as well as the conserved SET domain. Most studies have thus far focused on the longer isoform EZH2α, but EZH2β, which lacks exons 4 and 8, has been shown to be active. Furthermore, PRC2/EZH2β complexes act on distinct genes from that of its PRC2/EZH2α counterpart suggesting that each isoform may act to regulate a specific subset of genes. Additional evidence suggests that EZH2 may also be capable of lysine methylation independent of association with PRC2, when EZH2 is highly upregulated.


=== Lysine methylation ===

Methylation is the addition of a -CH3, or methyl group, to another molecule. In biology, methylation is typically catalyzed by enzymes, and methyl groups are commonly added to either proteins or nucleic acids. In EZH2-catalyzed methylation, the amino acid lysine in the histone h3 is methylated. This amino acid residue can be methylated up to three times on its terminal ammonium group. These methylated lysines are important in the control of mammalian gene expression and have a functional role in heterochromatin formation, X-chromosome inactivation and transcriptional regulation. In mammalian chromosomes, histone lysine methylation can either activate or repress genes depending the site of methylation. Recent work has shown that at least part of the silencing function of the EZH2 complex is the methylation of histone H3 on lysine 27. Methylation, and other modifications, take place on the histones. Methyl modifications can affect the binding of proteins to these histones and either activate or inhibit transcription.


=== Mechanism of catalysis ===
 
EZH2 is a member of the SET domain family of lysine methyltransferases which function to add methyl groups to lysine side chains of substrate proteins. SET methyltransferases depend on a S-Adenosyl methionine (SAM) cofactor to act as a methyl donor for their catalytic activity. SET domain proteins differ from other SAM-dependent methyltransferases in that they bind their substrate and SAM cofactor on opposite sides of the active site of the enzyme. This orientation of substrate and cofactor allows SAM to dissociate without disrupting substrate binding and can lead to multiple rounds of lysine methylation without substrate dissociation.
Although neither a substrate-bound or SAM-bound crystal structure for EZH2 has been determined, STAMP structure alignment with the human SET7/9 methyltransferase shows conserved tyrosine residues in almost identical positions within the putative active site of EZH2. 

It had been previously suggested that tyrosine 726 in the EZH2 active site was acting as a general base to de-protonate the substrate lysine but kinetic isotope effects have indicated that active site residues are not directly involved in the chemistry of the methyltransferase reaction. Instead these experiments support a mechanism in which the residues lower the pKa of the substrate lysine residue while simultaneously providing a channel for water to access the lysine side chain within the interior of the active site. Bulk solvent water can then easily deprotonate the lysine side chain, activating it for nucleophilic attack of the SAM cofactor in an SN2-like reaction resulting in transfer of the methyl group from SAM to the lysine side chain.

 
EZH2 primarily catalyzes mono- and di-methylation of H3K27 but a clinically relevant mutation of residue tyrosine 641 to phenylalanine (Y641F) results in higher H3K27 tri-methylation activity. It is proposed that the removal of the hydroxyl group on Y641 abrogates steric hindrance and allows for accommodation of a third methyl group on the substrate lysine.


== Clinical significance ==


=== Cancer ===
EZH2 is an attractive target for anti-cancer therapy because it helps cancerous cells divide and proliferate. It is found in larger amounts than in healthy cells in a wide range of cancers including breast, prostate, bladder, uterine, and renal cancers, as well as melanoma and lymphoma. EZH2 is a gene suppressor, so when it becomes overexpressed, many tumor suppressor genes that are normally turned on, are turned off. Inhibition of EZH2 function shrinks malignant tumors in some reported cases because those tumor suppressor genes are not silenced by EZH2. EZH2 typically is not expressed in healthy adults; it is only found in actively dividing cells, like those active during fetal development. Because of this characteristic, overexpression of EZH2 can be used as a diagnostic marker of cancer and some neurodegenerative disorders. However, there are cases where it is difficult to tell whether overexpression of EZH2 is the cause of a disease, or simply a consequence. If it is only a consequence, targeting EZH2 for inhibition may not cure the disease. One example of a cancer pathway in which EZH2 plays a role is the pRB-E2F pathway. It is downstream from the pRB-E2F pathway, and signals from this pathway lead to EZH2 overexpression. Another important characteristic of EZH2 is that when EZH2 is overexpressed, it can activate genes without forming PRC2. This is an issue because it means the methylation activity of the enzyme is not mediated by complex formation. In breast cancer cells, EZH2 activates genes that promote cell proliferation and survival. It can also activate regulatory genes like c-myc and cyclin D1 by interacting with Wnt signaling factors. Importantly, the mutation of tyrosine 641 in the active SET domain to a number of different amino acids is a common feature of some B-cell lymphomas.


=== Inhibitors ===
Developing an inhibitor of EZH2 and preventing unwanted histone methylation of tumor suppressor genes is a viable area of cancer research. EZH2 inhibitor development has focused on targeting the SET domain active site of the protein. Several inhibitors of EZH2 have been developed as of 2015, including 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), EPZ005687, EI1, GSK126, and UNC1999.

DZNep
DZNep has potential antiviral and anti-cancer properties because it lowers EZH2 levels and induces apoptosis in breast and colon cancer cells. DZNep inhibits the hydrolysis of S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine (SAH), which is a product-based inhibitor of all protein methyltransferases, leading to increased cellular concentrations of SAH which in turn inhibits EZH2. However, DZNep is not specific to EZH2 and also inhibits other DNA methyltransferases.
EPZ005687
In 2012, a company called Epizyme revealed EPZ005687, an S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) competitive inhibitor that is more selective than DZNep; it has a 50-fold increase in selectivity for EZH2 compared to EZH1. The drug blocks EZH2 activity by binding to the SET domain active site of the enzyme. EPZ005687 can also inhibit the Y641 and A677 mutants of EZH2, which may be applicable for treating non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Tazemetostat
In 2013, Epizyme began Phase I clinical trials with another EZH2 inhibitor, tazemetostat (EPZ-6438), for patients with B-cell lymphoma. In 2020, tazemetostat, with the tradename Tazverik, gained an FDA accelerated approval for the treatment of metastatic or locally advanced epithelioid sarcoma and an accelerated approval for the treatment of patients with relapsed follicular lymphoma later that year.
Sinefungin
Sinefungin is another SAM-competitive inhibitor, however, like DZNep, it is not specific to EZH2. It works by binding in the cofactor binding pocket of DNA methyltransferases to block methyl transfer. EI1 is another inhibitor, developed by Novartis, that showed EZH2 inhibitory activity in lymphoma tumor cells, including cells with the Y641 mutation. The mechanism of this inhibitor also involves competing with the SAM cofactor for binding to EZH2.
GSK126
GSK126 is a potent, SAM-competitive EZH2 inhibitor developed by GlaxoSmithKline, that has 150-fold selectivity over EZH1 and a Ki of 0.5-3 nM. UNC1999 was developed as an analogue of GSK126, and was the first orally bioavailable EZH2 inhibitor to show activity. However, it is less selective than its counterpart GSK126, and it binds to EZH1 as well, increasing the potential for off-target effects.
Combination therapies are being studied as possible treatments when primary treatments begin to fail. Etoposide, a topoisomerase inhibitor, when combined with an EZH2 inhibitor, becomes more effective for non-small cell lung cancers with BRG1 and EGFR mutations. However, EZH2 and lysine methylation can have tumor suppressing activity, for example in myelodysplastic syndrome, indicating that EZH2 inhibition may not be beneficial in all cases.


=== Skeletal development ===
EZH2 is crucial for epigenetic regulation of specific patterning during osteochondrogenesis, or bone and cartilage development, of the craniofacial skeletal elements.  By repressing inhibitors, EZH2 promotes bone and cartilage formation in facial skeletal features arising from the neural crest.  Above average EZH2 expression has become a biological marker for the most aggressive form for breast cancer known as Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC). But in 2013, a study performed by Zhaomei Mu and his associates concluded that the knockdown gene for EZH2 inhibited both the migration and invasion of IBC cells. Also in vivo, its knockdown gene suppressed tumor growth, most likely by the presence of fewer blood vessels, or reduced angiogenesis, in the EZH2 knockdown tumor versus EZH2 tumors.


=== Weaver Syndrome ===
Mutations in the EZH2 gene have been linked with Weaver syndrome, a rare disorder characterized by advanced bone age, macrocephaly, and hypertelorism. The histidine residue in the active site of the wild-type EZH2 was mutated to tyrosine in patients diagnosed with Weaver syndrome. The mutation likely interferes with cofactor binding and causes disruption of the natural function of the protein.


== Taxonomic distribution ==

Enhancer of zeste (E(z)) was originally identified in Drosophila melanogaster, and its mammalian homologs were subsequently identified and named EZH1 (enhancer of zeste homolog 1) and EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2). EZH2 is highly conserved through evolution. It and its homologs play essential roles in development, cell differentiation, and cell division in plants, insects, fish, and mammals. The following taxonomic tree is a depiction of EZH2's distribution throughout a wide variety of species.


== See also ==
Ezh2 gene


== References ==


== Further reading ==

================================================================================
# P53 (pathway)
# Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/P53
================================================================================

p53, also known as tumor protein p53, TP53, cellular tumor antigen p53 (UniProt name), or transformation-related protein 53 (TRP53) is a regulatory transcription factor protein that is often mutated in human cancers. The p53 proteins (originally thought to be, and often spoken of as, a single protein) are crucial in vertebrates, where they prevent cancer formation. As such, p53 has been described as "the guardian of the genome" because of its role in conserving stability by preventing genome mutation. Hence TP53 is classified as a tumor suppressor gene.
The TP53 gene is the most frequently mutated gene (>50%) in human cancer, indicating that the TP53 gene plays a crucial role in preventing cancer formation. TP53 gene encodes proteins that bind to DNA and regulate gene expression to prevent mutations of the genome. In addition to the full-length protein, the human TP53 gene encodes at least 12 protein isoforms.
Comparative genomic studies found pathogenic mutations absent in some Neanderthal populations, while modern humans exhibit a  expansion of over 1,000 mutated variations. Evidence suggests that the vast majority of these protein-coding variants arose very recently in human history, specifically concentrated within a window of 5,000 to 10,000 years ago. 


== Gene ==
In humans, the TP53 gene is located on the short arm of chromosome 17 (17p13.1). The gene spans 20 kb, with a non-coding exon 1 and a very long first intron of 10 kb, overlapping the Hp53int1 gene. The coding sequence contains five regions showing a high degree of conservation in vertebrates, predominantly in exons 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8, but the sequences found in invertebrates show only distant resemblance to mammalian TP53. TP53 orthologs have been identified in most mammals for which complete genome data are available. Elephants, with 20 genes for TP53, rarely get cancer.


== Structure ==

The full-length p53 protein (p53α) comprises seven distinct protein domains:

An acidic N-terminus transactivation domain (TAD), including activation domains 1 and 2 (AD1: residues 1–42; AD2: residues 43–63), which regulate transcription of several pro-apoptotic genes.
A proline-rich domain (residues 64–92), involved in apoptotic function and nuclear export via MAPK signaling.
A central DNA-binding domain (DBD; residues 102–292), containing a zinc atom and multiple arginine residues, essential for sequence-specific DNA interaction and co-repressor binding such as LMO3.
A nuclear localization sequence (NLS; residues 316–325), required for nuclear import.
A homo-oligomerization domain (OD; residues 307–355), which mediates tetramerization—essential for p53 activity in vivo.
A C-terminal regulatory domain (residues 356–393), which modulates the DNA-binding activity of the central domain.
Most cancer-associated mutations in TP53 occur in the DBD, impairing DNA binding and transcriptional activation. These are typically recessive loss-of-function mutations. By contrast, mutations in the OD can exert dominant negative effects by forming inactive complexes with wild-type p53.
Wild-type p53 is a labile protein containing both folded and intrinsically disordered regions that act synergistically.
Although designated as a 53 kDa protein by SDS-PAGE, the actual molecular weight of p53α is 43.7 kDa. The discrepancy is due to its high proline content, which slows electrophoretic migration.


== Tetramerization ==
p53 initially forms dimers cotranslationally during protein synthesis on ribosomes. Each dimer consists of two p53 monomers joined through their oligomerization domains.
The dimerization interface spans residues 325–356 and includes a beta-strand (residues 325–333), a alpha-helix (residues 335–356), and a sharp turn at the conserved hinge residue Gly334. This configuration links the beta-strand and alpha-helix to form a V-shaped monomer topology. The beta-strand contributes to the formation of an antiparallel intermolecular beta-sheet between two p53 monomers, stabilized by hydrophobic interactions involving Phe328, Leu330, and Ile332. The alpha-helix forms an antiparallel coiled-coil between the two monomers, with a packing angle of 156°. Helix–helix interactions are stabilized by hydrophobic contacts (e.g., Phe338, Phe341, Leu344) and electrostatic interactions, such as the Arg337–Asp352 salt bridge.
Following dimer formation, p53 dimers associate posttranslationally to form tetramers (dimers of dimers). The tetramerization domain (residues 325–356) plays a central role in stabilizing the tetrameric structure.
In the tetramer, the two primary dimers associate at an angle described as "roughly orthogonal," with a helix bundle packing angle (θ) of approximately 80°.
Tetramers represent the active form of p53 for DNA binding and transcriptional regulation.


== Isoforms ==
Like 95% of human genes, TP53 encodes multiple proteins, collectively known as the p53 isoforms. These vary in size from 3.5 to 43.7 kDa. Since their initial discovery in 2005, 12 human p53 isoforms have been identified: p53α, p53β, p53γ, ∆40p53α, ∆40p53β, ∆40p53γ, ∆133p53α, ∆133p53β, ∆133p53γ, ∆160p53α, ∆160p53β, and ∆160p53γ. Isoform expression is tissue-dependent, and p53α is never expressed alone.
The isoforms differ by the inclusion or exclusion of specific domains. Some, such as Δ133p53β/γ and Δ160p53α/β/γ, lack the transactivation or proline-rich domains and are deficient in apoptosis induction, illustrating the functional diversity of TP53.
Isoforms are generated through multiple mechanisms:

Alternative splicing of intron 9 creates the β and γ isoforms with altered C-termini.
An internal promoter in intron 4 produces the ∆133 and ∆160 isoforms, which lack part of the TAD and DBD.
Alternative translation initiation at codons 40 or 160 results in ∆40p53 and ∆160p53 isoforms, respectively.


== Function ==


=== DNA damage and repair ===

p53 regulates cell cycle progression, apoptosis, and genomic stability through multiple mechanisms:

Activates DNA repair proteins in response to DNA damage, suggesting a potential role in aging.
Arrests the cell cycle at the G1/S checkpoint upon DNA damage, allowing time for repair before progression.
Initiates apoptosis if the damage is beyond repair.
Essential for the senescence response triggered by short telomeres.
p53 functions as a transcription factor by binding DNA as a tetramer, a structure that is essential for its stability and effective DNA binding activity. Once bound to DNA, p53 induces the transcription of numerous genes involved in DNA repair pathways. This includes components of base excision repair (BER) such as OGG1 and MUTYH, nucleotide excision repair (NER) factors like DDB2 and XPC, mismatch repair (MMR) genes such as MSH2 and MLH1, and elements of homologous recombination (HR) and non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) repair. These transcriptional responses are crucial for the DNA damage response (DDR), allowing cells to efficiently repair damaged DNA and maintain genomic integrity. While p53's role is most clearly defined in transcriptional activation of repair genes, it also participates in non-transcriptional regulation of DNA repair processes, particularly in HR and NHEJ, by modulating protein interactions and chromatin accessibility.
p53 binds specific elements in the promoter of target genes, including CDKN1A, which encodes p21. Upon activation by p53, p21 inhibits cyclin-dependent kinases, leading to cell cycle arrest and contributing to tumor suppression. However, p21 can also be induced independently of p53 during processes such as differentiation, development, and in response to serum stimulation.
p21 (WAF1) binds to cyclin-CDK complexes (notably CDK2, CDK1, CDK4, and CDK6), inhibiting their activity and blocking the G1/S transition. This inhibition enforces a cell cycle pause that allows DNA repair to occur. In cells with functional p53, p21 is upregulated in response to DNA damage, ensuring this checkpoint control. In contrast, p53 mutations impair p21 induction and compromise this control.
In human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), although p21 mRNA is upregulated following DNA damage, the protein is not detectable. This reflects a nonfunctional p53-p21 axis at the G1/S checkpoint. This discrepancy is largely due to post-transcriptional repression, particularly by the miR-302 family of microRNAs, which inhibit p21 translation. Although p53 binds the CDKN1A promoter in hESCs, it does not regulate miR-302, which is constitutively expressed and suppresses p21 expression.
The p53 pathway is interconnected with the RB1 pathway via p14^ARF, which links the regulation of these key tumor suppressors.
p53 expression can be induced by UV radiation, which also causes DNA damage. In this context, p53 activation can initiate processes that lead to melanin production and tanning.


=== Stem cells ===
Levels of p53 play an important role in the maintenance of stem cells throughout development and the rest of human life.
In human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)s, p53 is maintained at low inactive levels. This is because activation of p53 leads to rapid differentiation of hESCs. Studies have shown that knocking out p53 delays differentiation and that adding p53 causes spontaneous differentiation, showing how p53 promotes differentiation of hESCs and plays a key role in cell cycle as a differentiation regulator. When p53 becomes stabilized and activated in hESCs, it increases p21 to establish a longer G1. This typically leads to abolition of S-phase entry, which stops the cell cycle in G1, leading to differentiation. Work in mouse embryonic stem cells has recently shown however that the expression of P53 does not necessarily lead to differentiation.  p53 also activates miR-34a and miR-145, which then repress the hESCs pluripotency factors, further instigating differentiation.
In adult stem cells, p53 regulation is important for maintenance of stemness in adult stem cell niches. Mechanical signals such as hypoxia affect levels of p53 in these niche cells through the hypoxia inducible factors, HIF-1α and HIF-2α. While HIF-1α stabilizes p53, HIF-2α suppresses it. Suppression of p53 plays important roles in cancer stem cell phenotype, induced pluripotent stem cells and other stem cell roles and behaviors, such as blastema formation. Cells with decreased levels of p53 have been shown to reprogram into stem cells with a much greater efficiency than normal cells. Papers suggest that the lack of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis gives more cells the chance to be reprogrammed. Decreased levels of p53 were also shown to be a crucial aspect of blastema formation in the legs of salamanders. p53 regulation is very important in acting as a barrier between stem cells and a differentiated stem cell state, as well as a barrier between stem cells being functional and being cancerous.


=== Other ===

Apart from the cellular and molecular effects above, p53 has a tissue-level anticancer effect that works by inhibiting angiogenesis. As tumors grow they need to recruit new blood vessels to supply them, and p53 inhibits that by (i) interfering with regulators of tumor hypoxia that also affect angiogenesis, such as HIF1 and HIF2, (ii) inhibiting the production of angiogenic promoting factors, and (iii) directly increasing the production of angiogenesis inhibitors, such as arresten.
p53 by regulating Leukemia Inhibitory Factor has been shown to facilitate implantation in the mouse and possibly human reproduction.
The immune response to infection also involves p53 and NF-κB. Checkpoint control of the cell cycle and of apoptosis by p53 is inhibited by some infections such as Mycoplasma bacteria, raising the specter of oncogenic infection.


== Regulation ==


=== Basal regulation ===
Under normal, unstressed conditions, p53 is maintained at low levels through continuous degradation mediated by the E3 ubiquitin ligase MDM2 (HDM2 in humans). MDM2 binds p53, exports it from the nucleus, and targets it for proteasomal degradation. Notably, p53 transcriptionally activates MDM2, establishing a classic negative feedback loop.
This feedback loop gives rise to damped oscillations in p53 levels, as demonstrated both experimentally and in mathematical models. These oscillations may determine cell fate decisions between survival and apoptosis.


=== Activation by cellular stress ===
p53 is activated in response to a range of cellular stressors, including DNA damage (for example from ultraviolet or ionizing radiation), osmotic shock, ribonucleotide depletion, oncogene activation, and some viral infections.
Activation involves stabilization of the p53 protein, resulting in its accumulation in the nucleus, and regulatory changes that promote sequence-specific DNA binding and transcriptional activation of target genes. These processes are initiated in part by phosphorylation of residues in the N-terminal transactivation domain by stress-activated kinases. Phosphorylation of sites within the Mdm2-binding region (for example Ser20) can reduce binding to MDM2 and thereby decrease ubiquitin-mediated degradation of p53.


=== Stress-responsive kinases ===
Kinases that regulate p53 phosphorylation can be divided into two broad groups. One group includes members of the MAPK pathways, including JNK1–3, ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK, which are activated by diverse cellular stresses such as oxidative stress and heat shock. A second group comprises DNA damage response kinases, including ATM, ATR and DNA-PK, together with downstream checkpoint kinases such as CHK1 and CHK2, which are activated by DNA damage and replication stress and contribute to p53 regulation through phosphorylation-dependent signalling.
Additional kinases implicated in p53 phosphorylation include the CDK-activating kinase (CAK; CDK7–cyclin H–MAT1), which has been shown to phosphorylate p53 (for example at Ser33) in vitro and in vivo, and TP53RK (PRPK), which has been reported to phosphorylate p53 at Ser15.
Oncogene-induced activation of p53 can also occur via p14ARF (ARF), which inhibits the p53 antagonist MDM2 and thereby stabilizes p53.


=== Deubiquitination ===
Several deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) modulate p53 stability by removing ubiquitin chains. USP7, also known as HAUSP, can deubiquitinate both p53 and MDM2. In unstressed cells, HAUSP preferentially stabilizes MDM2, and its depletion may paradoxically increase p53 levels. USP42 is another DUB that stabilizes p53 and enhances its ability to respond to stress. USP10 operates primarily in the cytoplasm, where it counteracts MDM2 by directly deubiquitinating p53. After DNA damage, USP10 translocates to the nucleus and further stabilizes p53. It does not interact with MDM2.


=== Post-translational modifications and cofactors ===
Phosphorylation of the N-terminus not only prevents MDM2 binding but also facilitates the recruitment of cofactors. Pin1 enhances conformational changes in p53, while p300 and PCAF acetylate the C-terminus, exposing the DNA-binding domain and enhancing transcriptional activation. Conversely, deacetylases such as Sirt1 and Sirt7 remove these modifications, suppressing apoptosis and promoting cell survival. Some oncogenes can also activate p53 indirectly by inhibiting MDM2.


=== Dynamics ===
Both experimental evidence and mathematical modeling indicate that p53 levels oscillate over time in response to cellular signals. These oscillations become more pronounced in the presence of DNA damage, such as double-stranded breaks or UV exposure. Modeling approaches also help illustrate how mutations in p53 isoforms affect oscillatory behavior, potentially informing tissue-specific therapeutic development.


=== Epigenetics ===
p53 function is also influenced by chromatin environment. The corepressor TRIM24 restricts p53 binding to epigenetically repressed loci by recognizing methylated histones. This interaction enables p53 to interpret local chromatin context and regulate gene expression in a locus-specific manner.


== Role in disease ==

If the TP53 gene is damaged, its ability to suppress tumors is severely compromised. Individuals who inherit only one functional copy of TP53 are predisposed to developing tumors in early adulthood, a condition known as Li–Fraumeni syndrome.
The TP53 gene can also be altered by mutagens—such as chemicals, radiation, or certain viruses—thereby increasing the likelihood of uncontrolled cell division. More than 50 percent of human tumors harbor a mutation or deletion of the TP53 gene. Loss of p53 function leads to genomic instability, frequently resulting in an aneuploidy phenotype.
Certain pathogens can also disrupt p53 activity. For example, human papillomavirus (HPV) produces the viral protein E6, which binds to and inactivates p53. In conjunction with the HPV protein E7, which inactivates the cell cycle regulator pRb, this promotes repeated cell division, clinically presenting as warts. High-risk HPV types, particularly types 16 and 18, can drive the progression from benign warts to low- or high-grade cervical dysplasia, reversible precancerous lesions. Persistent cervical infection can lead to irreversible changes, including carcinoma in situ and invasive cervical cancer. These outcomes are primarily driven by viral integration into the host genome and the continued expression of the E6 and E7 oncoproteins.


=== Mutations ===
Most p53 mutations are detected by DNA sequencing. However, it is known that single missense mutations can have a large spectrum from rather mild to very severe functional effects.

The large spectrum of cancer phenotypes due to mutations in the TP53 gene is also supported by the fact that different isoforms of p53 proteins have different cellular mechanisms for prevention against cancer. Mutations in TP53 can give rise to different isoforms, preventing their overall functionality in different cellular mechanisms and thereby extending the cancer phenotype from mild to severe. Recent studies show that p53 isoforms are differentially expressed in different human tissues, and the loss-of-function or gain-of-function mutations within the isoforms can cause tissue-specific cancer or provide cancer stem cell potential in different tissues. TP53 mutation also hits energy metabolism and increases glycolysis in breast cancer cells.


==== Codon 72 variations ====
A common human polymorphism in TP53 involves a substitution of arginine for proline at codon 72 of exon 4. Numerous studies have explored the relationship between this variation and cancer susceptibility, yielding mixed results. For instance, a 2009 meta-analysis found no association between the codon 72 polymorphism and cervical cancer risk.
Other studies have identified possible associations between the codon 72 polymorphism and various cancers. A 2011 study reported that the proline variant significantly increased pancreatic cancer risk in males. Another study found that proline homozygosity was associated with decreased breast cancer risk in Arab women. Additional research suggested that TP53 codon 72 polymorphisms, in combination with MDM2 SNP309 and A2164G, may affect susceptibility and age of onset for non-oropharyngeal cancers in women. A separate 2011 study linked the polymorphism to an increased risk of lung cancer in a Korean population.
However, meta-analyses published in 2011 found no significant associations between the codon 72 variant and risks of either colorectal or endometrial cancer. A study of a Brazilian birth cohort found an association between the arginine variant and individuals without a family history of cancer. Meanwhile, another study reported that individuals with the homozygous Pro/Pro genotype had a significantly increased risk of renal cell carcinoma.


=== Therapeutic reactivation and gene therapy ===
While increasing p53 levels might appear beneficial for treating cancer, sustained p53 activation can cause premature aging. A more promising approach involves restoring normal, endogenous p53 function. In some tumor types, this leads to regression via apoptosis or normalization of cell growth.
The first commercial gene therapy, Gendicine, was approved in China in 2003 for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. It delivers a functional copy of the TP53 gene using a modified adenovirus.
The small-molecule inhibitor MI-63 can bind to MDM2, blocking its interaction with p53 and reactivating p53 in cancers where its function is suppressed.


=== Diagnostic and prognostic significance ===


== Discovery ==
p53 was identified in 1979 by Lionel Crawford, David P. Lane, Arnold Levine, and Lloyd Old, working at Imperial Cancer Research Fund (UK), Princeton University/UMDNJ (Cancer Institute of New Jersey), and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, respectively. It had been hypothesized to exist before as the target of the SV40 virus, a strain that induced development of tumors. The name p53 is in fact a misnomer, as it describes the apparent molecular mass measured when it was first discovered, though it was later realised this was an overestimate: the correct molecular mass is only 43.7 kDa.
The TP53 gene from the mouse was first cloned by Peter Chumakov of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR in 1982, and independently in 1983 by Moshe Oren in collaboration with David Givol (Weizmann Institute of Science). The human TP53 gene was cloned in 1984 and the full length clone in 1985.
It was initially presumed to be an oncogene due to the use of mutated cDNA following purification of tumor cell mRNA. Its role as a tumor suppressor gene was revealed in 1989 by Bert Vogelstein at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine and Arnold Levine at Princeton University. p53 went on to be identified as a transcription factor by Guillermina Lozano working at MD Anderson Cancer Center.
Warren Maltzman, of the Waksman Institute of Rutgers University first demonstrated that TP53 was responsive to DNA damage in the form of ultraviolet radiation. In a series of publications in 1991–92, Michael Kastan of Johns Hopkins University, reported that TP53 was a critical part of a signal transduction pathway that helped cells respond to DNA damage.
In 1993, p53 was voted molecule of the year by Science magazine.


== Interactions ==
p53 has been shown to interact with:


== See also ==
Eprenetapopt, a reactivator of some mutant forms of p53
Pifithrin, an inhibitor of p53


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

"p53 Knowledgebase". Lane Group at the Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB), Singapore. Archived from the original on 2006-01-03. Retrieved 2008-04-06.
GeneReviews/NCBI/NIH/UW entry on Li-Fraumeni Syndrome
TUMOR PROTEIN p53 @ OMIM
p53 restoration of function
p53 @ The Atlas of Genetics and Cytogenetics in Oncology and Haematology
TP53 Gene @ GeneCards
p53 News provided by insciences organisation
Goodsel DS (2002-07-01). "p53 Tumor Suppressor". Molecule of the Month. RCSB Protein Data Bank. Retrieved 2008-04-06.
Soussi T. "p53 Web Site". Retrieved 2008-04-06.
Living LFS A non-profit Li-Fraumeni Syndrome patient support organization
The George Pantziarka TP53 Trust A support group from the UK for people with Li-Fraumeni Syndrome or other TP53-related disorders
IARC TP53 Somatic Mutations database maintained at IARC, Lyon, by Magali Olivier
PDBe-KB provides an overview of all the structure information available in the PDB for Human P53.
scientific animation conformational changes of p53 upon binding to DNA